Mental Health Issues
in Adolescents
GUIDELINES FOR PARENTS
Indian Academy of Pediatrics (IAP)
Convener:  Roshni Sonawane
Members:  Nikhil Oza, Srinivas
Lakmivenkateshiah,
Sushma Pankaj Desai
Reviewer:  Satish Sharma
10 FAQs on MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES IN ADOLESCENTS
Under the Auspices of the IAP Action Plan 2021–2022
Piyush Gupta
Remesh Kumar R
Bakul Parekh
GV Basavaraja
Deepak Ugra
IAP President 2021
IAP President-Elect 2021
IAP President 2020
IAP HSG 2020–2021
National Co-ordinator
1.	 My son is 10 years old. I want to know more about his upcoming phase of adolescence, what is it?
2.	 My daughter is 13 years old. I want to know why is it important to understand this phase of adolescence that she is going
through.
3.	 My son is 15 years old. What are the various mental health challenges he could face?
4.	 I have a teenager daughter and I am keen to know about the various “risk-taking behaviors” associated with this phase.
5.	 My son is 14 years old. Why is this phase so critical? what can we do as parents to help our teenagers?
6.	 When it comes to teenage behavior, how do we know what is normal and what is not?
7.	 My daughter is 15 years old and I am worried that she might self-harm. How do I identify thoughts of self-harm?
8.	 My son is 15 years old and has very low threshold for getting angry and often irritable. What could be the reason? What
can I do to help him?
9.	 My daughter is 13 years old and often complains that “no one understands her”. what should I do?
10.	 My 13-year-old son has lost interest in academic activities. I am worried and not sure what to do?
Core Group
National Co-ordinator: Deepak Ugra
Member Secretaries: Upendra Kinjawadekar, Samir Dalwai
Members: Apurba Ghosh, CP Bansal, Santosh Soans, Somashekhar Nimbalkar, S Sitaraman
© Indian Academy of Pediatrics
IAP Parent Guideline Committee
Chairpersons: Piyush Gupta, Bakul Parekh
IAP Co-ordinators: GV Basavaraja, Harish Kumar Pemde, Purna Kurkure
Mental Health Issues
in Adolescents
Adolescence is an evolving phase of transition
from childhood to adulthood involving a range
of physical, mental, and psychosocial changes.
It is a period of enormous energy, vibrant physical
changes, skill development, and new experiences.
The World
Health
Organization
defines
“adolescence” as the period of life between the
ages of 10–19 years and “youth” as the period
between 15 and 24 years. Overall, it combines
these age groups and assigns the term “young
people” to those between 10 and 24 years. Because
adolescence spans such a wide age range and
encompasses diverse and complex developmental
changes, it is often divided into three substages:
early adolescence (10–14 years), mid-adolescence
(15–17 years), and late adolescence (>17 years).
Early phase 10–14 years is described most difficult
to handle by many parents. Adolescent is treated
simultaneously as child and adult which adds to
further confusion.
My son is 10 years old. I want to
know more about his upcoming
phase of adolescence, what is it?
Mental Health Issues  in Adolescents
Adolescents can be addressed as the
building blocks of the society and
upcoming
drivers
prospective
economic growth and innovation. This
phase reflects an age of opportunity.
Current global demographics reflect
young people as the largest statistics
over the years forming a quarter of the
universal population.
It is thus a very complex and critical
period  of life so it is important not to
overlook their physical  and mental
health needs when they arise. It can be
a time fraught with uncertainty as they
struggle with the multifaceted changes
moving toward attaining independence.
It is sometimes best not to pass things off
as “just a teenage thing”. Changes may be
a red flag for a number of more serious
issues.
As per the World Health Organization,
globally up to 20% children and adole­
scent suffer from disabling mental health
issues. Psychosocial basis appears to be
the most common attributing factor
for several health problems in young
people as compared to biological
basis. Typically, emotional vulnerability
and associated risk-taking behaviors
while
difficulties
negotiating
the
developmental challenges of adole­
scence could result in such difficulties.
About 75% of adult mental health
issues can initiate prior to 25 years
of age. Mental health issues could range
from depression, anxiety, deliberate self-
harm, or suicidal ideation. These could
further be associated with risk-taking
behaviors such as accidents and injuries
(either self-inflicted or unintentional)
and behavioral problems, such as
substance abuse and unsafe sexual
experimentation, aggression, bullying,
violence, and criminal acts.
During this phase of increasing social
exposure, young people could experience
intense anxiety when having to perform
in front of other people, called as social
anxiety. During this phase, the young
people are developing clear identity
and are more vulnerable to develop
body image issues and related eating
disorders. Mood swings and depression
in the context of poor emotional control
are common. Deliberate self-harm could
be in the form of cutting or taking repeat
overdoses.
My daughter is 13 years
old. I want to know why is it
important to understand this
phase of adolescence that she
is going through.
My son is 15 years old. What
are the various mental health
challenges he could face?
Mental Health Issues  in Adolescents
Beyond being an important period of
human development, adolescence is also
a time of changing health needs. This
is especially in relation to the onset of
new health risk behaviors (e.g., smoking,
alcohol, and other drug use), the
emergence of mental health disorders,
new sexual and reproductive health
needs [e.g., contraception, pregnancy,
sexually transmitted infections (STIs),
gender orientation), and greater risks
from injury (e.g., road traffic injuries).
Risk of various substance abuse
(tobacco, alcohol, and other illicit drug
use) can also accompany this phase. It is
very vital to educate the young person
about the short-term as well as long-
term hazards of substance abuse which
are not only limited to mental health or
behavioral issues but can also lead to
developmental and learning issues. In
addition, addictions can predispose to
various cancers. Further awareness needs
to be created about the risk of alcohol
consumption and unplanned teenage
pregnancy that can lead to a broad-
spectrum of developmental, behavioral,
learning issues in children along with risk
of cardiac problems.
It will be highly beneficial for parents and
other family members to be involved in
the health of their teenagers. Getting
acquainted with your child could assist
with identifying early changes and
seek help before things get serious.
Every individual’s needs vary and even
if any concerns appear, should not be
casually dismissed. The situations faced
by the young people can be novel with
no prior exposure and so often their
coping strategies could be very intense
as compared to adults, who have relative
experience and due to which they can
provide a balanced reaction. Especially,
in situations like breakup of a relationship
or parental separation can demand
additional family/social support.
It is also vital to revisit your parenting
skills. Often parental adverse or strict
childhood experiences can influence
their parenting skills. Instead of imposing
parental vision for their children, this
is the time to understand the young
person’s concepts about their personal
and professional life by providing
appropriate support. Strict parenting
and academic pressure is one of the
popular reasons for suicidal tendencies
in our subcontinent and a rapid cultural
change in this context can prevent
multiple prospective suicidal fatalities.
I have a teenager daughter
and I am keen to know about
the various “risk-taking
behaviors” associated with
this phase.
My son is 14 years old. Why
is this phase so critical? what
can we do as parents to help
our teenagers?
Mental Health Issues  in Adolescents
Things to look out for are as early flags: health worries such as headaches
or aches and pains, social withdrawal, avoidance behavior, including
nonattendance at school or retreating from activities that used to interest
them. Sudden changes in behavior or behavior that is out of character
including low mood, feeling unhappy or feeling irritable, angry outbursts
and conflict with others at home, aggression, fear, avoidant tendency,
sleeplessness, saying they think they are depressed, self-harm thoughts
or attempts, tiredness, and getting bored. Getting moody and grumpy
is a common thing for the depressed adolescent. Difficulties with eating
too much and sleeping too much are common as are anxiety symptoms
and excessive worries.
Thoughts of self-harm and suicide can be prominent in young people
with emotional disorders such as depression. It is important to be
able to look for early warning signs in a teenager at risk for self-harm.
Initial question to enquire would be to ask about things the teenager
would be enjoying in life. A sense of reduced enjoyment in life could
be referred to as feeling worthless. There is any suggestion of self-
harm thoughts, an immediate counseling session should be organized.
Meanwhile, exploring thoughts about the actual plan toward putting
self-harm or suicidal thoughts in action should be considered.
When it comes to teenage behavior, how do we
know what is normal and what is not?
My daughter is 15 years old and I am worried that
she might self-harm. How do I identify thoughts
of self-harm?
Mental Health Issues  in Adolescents
Anger in teenagers is like a tip of an iceberg. There are underlying
contributory factors that need to be explored, e.g., mental health
concerns such as depression, anxiety, body image issues, social bullying,
breakups, or behavioral issues such as attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), autistic spectrum disorder, etc. Initiating a process to
understand the young person by optimizing family and social support
is crucial. Further, organizing an assessment by a medical practitioner
(preferably with expertise in adolescent medicine) and a counselor.
She is going through this challenging phase that involves multiple
changes at varied domains. This is the time they are moving toward
attaining independence at several levels. Parental role is to give guarded
freedom that permits the young person to explore their potentials and
also experiment to a certain extent yet being supervised and supported
to avoid risk taking behaviors. One of the keys is to start treating them as
an adult, acknowledging their views, and giving more responsibilities to
make independent decisions. Offer a listening ear by befriending them.
Organizing a counselor to help them confide their thoughts is very
useful.
My son is 15 years old and has very low threshold
for getting angry and often irritable. What could be
the reason? What can I do to help him?
My daughter is 13 years old and often
complains that “no one understands her”.
What should I do?
Mental Health Issues  in Adolescents
First step will be to get acquainted with his teaching
environment to understand the factors. Is it a sudden
drop or was always low? Various reasons could be
learning difficulties, bullying, mental health issues,
behavioral problems, breakups, competitive peer or
academic pressure, etc. Discussions with his teachers,
school principal, and school counselor could provide.
There could be underlying medical causes that will need
to be assessed for as well. Optimizing their educational
support is very crucial. Your role will be to understand
the situation and also help the young person to
understand themselves and reassure that together you
will work toward an appropriate solution.
Salient Tips for Parents
Provide continuous support and guidance to adolescents.
Watch for red-flag signs in mood changes of your wards.
Keep verbal and nonverbal lines open for communication.
Encourage healthy lifestyle, physical activity, and guide how
to cope with negative emotions and stress.
My 13-year-old son has lost interest in
academic activities. I am worried and
not sure what to do?
Q10