1/17/2018
Chapter 3 - 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines - health.gov
1/9
health.gov
health.gov » Physical Activity Guidelines » Guidelines » Chapter 3
Chapter 3: Active Children and Adolescents
Regular physical activity in children and adolescents promotes health
and Òtness. Compared to those who are inactive, physically active
youth have higher levels of cardiorespiratory Òtness and stronger
muscles. They also typically have lower body fatness. Their bones are
stronger, and they may have reduced symptoms of anxiety and
depression.
Youth who are regularly active also have a better chance of a healthy adulthood. Children and
adolescents don't usually develop chronic diseases, such as heart disease, hypertension, type 2
diabetes, or osteoporosis. However, risk factors for these diseases can begin to develop early
in life. Regular physical activity makes it less likely that these risk factors will develop and more
likely that children will remain healthy as adults.
Youth can achieve substantial health beneÒts by doing moderate- and vigorous-intensity
physical activity for periods of time that add up to 60 minutes (1 hour) or more each day. This
activity should include aerobic activity as well as age-appropriate muscle- and bone–
strengthening activities. Although current science is not complete, it appears that, as with
adults, the total amount of physical activity is more important for achieving health beneÒts
than is any one component (frequency, intensity, or duration) or speciÒc mix of activities
(aerobic, muscle-strengthening, bone strengthening). Even so, bone-strengthening activities
remain especially important for children and young adolescents because the greatest gains in
bone mass occur during the years just before and during puberty. In addition, the majority of
peak bone mass is obtained by the end of adolescence.
This chapter provides physical activity guidance for children and adolescents aged 6 to 17, and
focuses on physical activity beyond baseline activity.
Parents and other adults who work with or care for youth should be familiar with the
Guidelines in this chapter. These adults should be aware that, as children become adolescents,
they typically reduce their physical activity. Adults play an important role in providing age-
appropriate opportunities for physical activity. In doing so, they help lay an important
foundation for life-long, health-promoting physical activity. Adults need to encourage active
play in children and encourage sustained and structured activity as children grow older.
1/17/2018
Chapter 3 - 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines - health.gov
2/9
For More Information
See Chapter 2—Physical Activity
Has Many Health BeneÒts
(chapter2.aspx), for more on
overload and progression.
Key Guidelines for Children and Adolescents
Children and adolescents should do 60 minutes (1 hour) or more of physical activity daily.
Aerobic: Most of the 60 or more minutes a day should be either moderate- or vigorous-intensity
aerobic physical activity, and should include vigorous-intensity physical activity at least 3 days a
week.
Muscle-strengthening: As part of their 60 or more minutes of daily physical activity, children and
adolescents should include muscle-strengthening physical activity on at least 3 days of the week.
Bone-strengthening: As part of their 60 or more minutes of daily physical activity, children and
adolescents should include bone-strengthening physical activity on at least 3 days of the week.
It is important to encourage young people to participate in physical activities that are appropriate for
their age, that are enjoyable, and that o×er variety.
Explaining the Guidelines
Types of Activity
The Guidelines for children and adolescents focus on three types of activity: aerobic, muscle-
strengthening, and bone-strengthening. Each type has important health beneÒts.
Aerobic activities are those in which young people rhythmically move their large
muscles. Running, hopping, skipping, jumping rope, swimming, dancing, and bicycling are
all examples of aerobic activities. Aerobic activities increase cardiorespiratory Òtness.
Children often do activities in short bursts, which may not technically be aerobic activities.
However, this document will also use the term aerobic to refer to these brief activities.
Muscle-strengthening activities make muscles do
more work than usual during activities of daily life. This
is called "overload," and it strengthens the muscles.
Muscle-strengthening activities can be unstructured
and part of play, such as playing on playground
equipment, climbing trees, and playing tug-of-war. Or
these activities can be structured, such as lifting weights or working with resistance
bands.
Bone-strengthening activities produce a force on the bones that promotes bone
growth and strength. This force is commonly produced by impact with the ground.
Running, jumping rope, basketball, tennis, and hopscotch are all examples of bone
strengthening activities. As these examples illustrate, bone-strengthening activities can
also be aerobic and muscle-strengthening.
How Age Inuences Physical Activity in Children and Adolescents
1/17/2018
Chapter 3 - 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines - health.gov
3/9
For More Information
Children and adolescents should meet the Guidelines by doing activity that is appropriate for
their age. Their natural patterns of movement di×er from those of adults. For example,
children are naturally active in an intermittent way, particularly when they do unstructured
active play. During recess and in their free play and games, children use basic aerobic and
bone-strengthening activities, such as running, hopping, skipping, and jumping, to develop
movement patterns and skills. They alternate brief periods of moderate- and vigorous-intensity
physical activity with brief periods of rest. Any episode of moderate- or vigorous–intensity
physical activity, however brief, counts toward the Guidelines.
Children also commonly increase muscle strength through unstructured activities that involve
lifting or moving their body weight or working against resistance. Children don't usually do or
need formal muscle-strengthening programs, such as lifting weights.
Regular physical activity in children and adolescents promotes a healthy body weight and body composition.
As children grow into adolescents, their patterns of physical activity change. They are able to
play organized games and sports and are able to sustain longer periods of activity. But they still
commonly do intermittent activity, and no period of moderate- or vigorous-intensity activity is
too short to count toward the Guidelines.
Adolescents may meet the Guidelines by doing free play, structured programs, or both.
Structured exercise programs can include aerobic activities, such as playing a sport, and
muscle-strengthening activities, such as lifting weights, working with resistance bands, or using
body weight for resistance (such as push-ups, pull-ups, and sit-ups). Muscle-strengthening
activities count if they involve a moderate to high level of e×ort and work the major muscle
groups of the body: legs, hips, back, abdomen, chest, shoulders, and arms.
Levels of Intensity for Aerobic Activity
Children and adolescents can meet the Guidelines by doing a combination of moderate- and
vigorous intensity aerobic physical activities or by doing only vigorous-intensity aerobic physical
activities.
Youth should not do only moderate-intensity activity. It's important to include vigorous-
intensity activities because they cause more improvement in cardiorespiratory Òtness.
The intensity of aerobic physical activity can be deÒned on either an absolute or a relative
scale. Either scale can be used to monitor the intensity of aerobic physical activity:
1/17/2018
Chapter 3 - 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines - health.gov
4/9
See Appendix 1 (appendix1.aspx)
for more information on using
absolute or relative intensity.
Absolute intensity is based on the rate of energy
expenditure during the activity, without taking into
account a person's cardiorespiratory Òtness.
Relative intensity uses a person's level of
cardiorespiratory Òtness to assess level of e×ort.
Relative intensity describes a person's level of e×ort relative to his or her Òtness. As a rule of
thumb, on a scale of 0 to 10, where sitting is 0 and the highest level of e×ort possible is 10,
moderate-intensity activity is a 5 or 6. Young people doing moderate-intensity activity will
notice that their hearts are beating faster than normal and they are breathing harder than
normal. Vigorous-intensity activity is at a level of 7 or 8. Youth doing vigorous-intensity activity
will feel their heart beating much faster than normal and they will breathe much harder than
normal.
When adults supervise children, they generally can't ascertain a child's heart or breathing rate.
But they can observe whether a child is doing an activity which, based on absolute energy
expenditure, is considered to be either moderate or vigorous. For example, a child walking
briskly to school is doing moderate-intensity activity. A child running on the playground is doing
vigorous-intensity activity. The table on page 18 includes examples of activities classiÒed by
absolute intensity. It shows that the same activity can be moderate or vigorous intensity,
depending on factors such as speed (for example bicycling slowly or fast).
Examples of Moderate- and Vigorous-Intensity Aerobic Physical
Activities and Muscle- and Bone-Strengthening Activities for
Children and Adolescents
Type of
Physical
Activity
Age Group
Children
Age Group
Adults
1/17/2018
Chapter 3 - 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines - health.gov
5/9
Moderate–
intensity
aerobic
Active recreation, such as
hiking, skateboarding,
rollerblading
Bicycle riding
Brisk walking
Active recreation, such as
canoeing, hiking, skateboarding,
rollerblading
Brisk walking
Bicycle riding (stationary or road
bike)
Housework and yard work, such
as sweeping or pushing a lawn
mower
Games that require catching and
throwing, such as baseball and
softball
Vigorous–
intensity
aerobic
Active games involving
running and chasing, such as
tag
Bicycle riding
Jumping rope
Martial arts, such as karate
Running
Sports such as soccer, ice or
Òeld hockey, basketball,
swimming, tennis
Cross-country skiing
Active games involving running
and chasing, such as Óag football
Bicycle riding
Jumping rope
Martial arts, such as karate
Running
Sports such as soccer, ice or Òeld
hockey, basketball, swimming,
tennis
Vigorous dancing
Cross-country skiing
Muscle-
strengthening
Games such as tug-of-war
ModiÒed push-ups (with
knees on the Óoor)
Resistance exercises using
body weight or resistance
bands
Rope or tree climbing
Sit-ups (curl-ups or crunches)
Swinging on playground
equipment/bars
Games such as tug-of-war
Push-ups and pull-ups
Resistance exercises with
exercise bands, weight
machines, hand-held weights
Climbing wall
Sit-ups (curl-ups or crunches)
1/17/2018
Chapter 3 - 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines - health.gov
6/9
Bone-
strengthening
Games such as hopscotch
Hopping, skipping, jumping
Jumping rope
Running
Sports such as gymnastics,
basketball, volleyball, tennis
Hopping, skipping, jumping
Jumping rope
Running
Sports such as gymnastics,
basketball, volleyball, tennis
Note: Some activities, such as bicycling, can be moderate or vigorous intensity, depending upon
level of e×ort
Physical Activity and Healthy Weight
Regular physical activity in children and adolescents promotes a healthy body weight and body
composition.
Exercise training in overweight or obese youth can improve body composition by reducing
overall levels of fatness as well as abdominal fatness. Research studies report that fatness can
be reduced by regular physical activity of moderate to vigorous intensity 3 to 5 times a week,
for 30 to 60 minutes.
Meeting the Guidelines
American youth vary in their physical activity participation. Some don't participate at all, others
participate in enough activity to meet the Guidelines, and some exceed the Guidelines.
Children and adolescents can meet the Physical Activity Guidelines and become regularly physically active in
many ways.
One practical strategy to promote activity in youth is to replace inactivity with activity whenever
possible. For example, where appropriate and safe, young people should walk or bicycle to
school instead of riding in a car. Rather than just watching sporting events on television, young
people should participate in age-appropriate sports or games.
Children and adolescents who do not meet the Guidelines should slowly increase
their activity in small steps and in ways that they enjoy. A gradual increase in the number
of days and the time spent being active will help reduce the risk of injury.
Children and adolescents who meet the Guidelines should continue being active on a
daily basis and, if appropriate, become even more active. Evidence suggests that even
1/17/2018
Chapter 3 - 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines - health.gov
7/9
more than 60 minutes of activity every day may provide additional health beneÒts.
Children and adolescents who exceed the Guidelines should maintain their activity
level and vary the kinds of activities they do to reduce the risk of overtraining or injury.
Children and adolescents with disabilities are more likely to be inactive than those without
disabilities. Youth with disabilities should work with their health-care provider to understand
the types and amounts of physical activity appropriate for them. When possible, children and
adolescents with disabilities should meet the Guidelines. When young people are not able to
participate in appropriate physical activities to meet the Guidelines, they should be as active as
possible and avoid being inactive.
Getting and Staying Active: Real-Life Examples
Children and adolescents can meet the Physical Activity Guidelines and become regularly
physically active in many ways. Here are just two examples showing how a child and an
adolescent can be physically active for at least 60 minutes each day over the course of a week.
These examples illustrate that even though the activity patterns are di×erent, each young
person is meeting the Guidelines by getting the equivalent of at least 60 minutes or more of
aerobic activity each day that is at least moderate intensity. Both are also doing vigorous-
intensity, muscle-strengthening, and bone strengthening activities on at least 3 days a week.
Harold: A 7-Year-Old Child
Harold participates in many types of physical activities in many places. For example, during
physical education class, he jumps rope and does gymnastics and sit-ups. During recess, he
plays on the playground—often by doing activities that require running and climbing. He also
likes to play soccer with his friends and family. When Harold gets home from school, he likes to
engage in active play (playing tag) and ride his bicycle with his friends and family.
Harold gets 60 minutes of physical activity each day that is at least moderate intensity. He
participates in the following activities each day:
Monday: Walks to and from school (20 minutes), plays actively with family (20 minutes), jumps
rope (10 minutes), does gymnastics (10 minutes).
Tuesday: Walks to and from school (20 minutes), plays on playground (25 minutes), climbs on
playground equipment (15 minutes).
1/17/2018
Chapter 3 - 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines - health.gov
8/9
Wednesday: Walks to and from school (20 minutes), plays actively with friends (25 minutes),
jumps rope (10 minutes), runs (5 minutes), does sit-ups (2 minutes).
Thursday: Plays actively with family (30 minutes), plays soccer (30 minutes).
Friday: Walks to and from school (20 minutes), plays actively with friends (25 minutes), bicycles
(15 minutes).
Saturday: Plays on playground (30 minutes), climbs on playground equipment (15 minutes),
bicycles (15 minutes).
Sunday: Plays on playground (10 minutes), plays soccer (40 minutes), plays tag with family (10
minutes).
Harold meets the Guidelines by doing vigorous–intensity aerobic activities, bone-strengthening
activities, and muscle-strengthening activities on at least 3 days of the week:
Vigorous-intensity aerobic activities 6 times during the week: jumping rope (Monday and
Wednesday), running (Wednesday), soccer (Thursday and Sunday), playing tag (Sunday);
Bone-strengthening activities 6 times during the week: jumping rope (Monday and
Wednesday), running (Wednesday), soccer (Thursday and Sunday), playing tag (Sunday);
and
Muscle-strengthening activities 4 times during the week: gymnastics (Monday), climbing
on playground equipment (Tuesday and Saturday), sit-ups (Wednesday).
Maria: A 16-Year-Old Adolescent
Maria participates in many types of physical activities in many places. For example, during
physical education class, she plays tennis and does sit-ups and push-ups. She also likes to play
basketball at the YMCA, do yoga, and go dancing with friends. Maria likes to take her dog on
walks and hikes.
Maria gets 60 or more minutes of daily physical activity that is at least moderate intensity. She
participates in the following activities each day:
Monday: Walks dog (10 minutes), plays basketball at YMCA (50 minutes).
Tuesday: Walks dog (10 minutes), plays tennis (30 minutes), does sit-ups and push-ups (5
minutes), walks briskly with friends (15 minutes).
Wednesday: Walks dog (10 minutes), plays basketball at YMCA (50 minutes).
1/17/2018
Chapter 3 - 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines - health.gov
9/9
Thursday: Walks dog (10 minutes), plays tennis (30 minutes), does sit-ups and push-ups (5
minutes), plays with children at the park while babysitting (15 minutes).
Friday: Plays Frisbee  in park (45 minutes), mows lawn (30 minutes).
Saturday: Goes dancing with friends (60 minutes), does yoga (30 minutes).
Sunday: Hikes (60 minutes).
Maria meets the Guidelines by doing vigorous-intensity aerobic activities, bone-strengthening
activities, and muscle-strengthening activities on at least 3 days of the week:
Vigorous-intensity aerobic activities 4 times during the week: basketball (Monday and
Wednesday), dancing (Saturday), hiking (Sunday);
Bone-strengthening activities 4 times during the week: basketball (Monday and
Wednesday), dancing (Saturday), hiking (Sunday); and
Muscle-strengthening activities 3 times during the week: sit-ups and push-ups (Tuesday
and Thursday), yoga (Saturday).
This icon,
, means that you are leaving health.gov and entering a non-federal website. View full disclaimer
(/communication/exitdisclaimer.asp).
<< Previous (chapter2.aspx)
Table of Contents
(/paguidelines/guidelines/)
Next >> (chapter4.aspx)