Source:  Paediatrics
Reference No:  6297-2
Issue date:  09/06/2022
Review date:  09/06/2025
Page 1 of 3
Healthy eating for teenagers
This dietary advice sheet gives some general information to help you make the
recommended changes to your diet.  If you need more detailed advice, or if you are
following a special diet that makes it difficult to make these changes, please ask
your doctor to refer you to a registered dietitian.
Teenagers require regular meals and snacks to give them the
energy and nutrients they need to grow and fulfill their active
lifestyles.  Eating family meals together is often becoming quite
difficult due to after school activities, clubs and going out with
friends, however trying to sit down as a family where possible will
encourage them to enjoy a variety of foods.  Snacking all day in
place of meals, usually results in eating an unbalanced diet.
Breakfast is essential every day as it gives teenagers an energy boost to cope with
busy mornings at school or college.  Choosing the healthy option in the school
canteen or taking a packed lunch to college and then having a balanced family meal
is suggested to meet the healthy eating guidelines.
What does a balanced diet mean?
1. Fruit and vegetables:  Fruit and vegetables provide lots of vitamins and
minerals which are important for fighting off illnesses.  They also contain fiber
which helps to maintain regular bowel movements and prevent constipation.
Fruit and vegetables can be included as part of a meal, chopped up and as a
snack or as fruit juice or smoothies.  Teenagers should aim for at least 5 portions
of fruit and vegetables every day.  Fruit and vegetables can also help to keep our
skin supple and prevent spots!
A portion is equal to:
1 medium sized banana, apple, orange, peach
2 small fruits e.g. plums, apricots, satsumas
handful of grapes, cherries, strawberries
3 tablespoons of cooked vegetables or fruit
small salad
Page 2 of 3
2. Cereals, potatoes, rice and pasta:  These are all carbohydrate foods which
give slow release energy.  Try and choose the low sugar varieties of breakfast
cereals such as Weetabix, Shredded Wheat, or Shreddies® and add dried fruit
rather than sugar.  Choose unrefined higher fibre types of bread and pasta such
as wholemeal and granary bread, whole wheat pasta and brown rice.  Teenagers
should aim to have a carbohydrate source at each meal time plus sometimes as
snacks between meals too if they are active.
3. Meat, fish and alternatives:  These are all protein foods which are important for
helping teenagers to grow and repair muscles.  Try and include a variety of
different protein containing foods such as lean meats, fish, baked beans, eggs,
pulses, peas and lentils.  Teenagers should aim to have protein at least twice a
day.
4. Milk and dairy foods:  These are all calcium containing foods and are important
in the diet to support bone and teeth development.  Teenagers should be offered
either semi skimmed or skimmed milk, and should aim to have dairy foods three
times a day.  Soya products which are calcium enriched are suitable alternatives
for those who cannot tolerate or do not wish to eat dairy products.
5. Foods containing fat and sugar:  Fat is an important part of the diet to enable
growth and development, and provide fat soluble vitamins.  Ideally healthy fats
should be offered such as those from vegetable sources e.g. sunflower oil,
rapeseed oils and spreads, and not large quantities of fats from pastries, crisps
and manufactured products.  Sugar does not give us any vitamins or minerals,
only calories which can lead to excess weight gain if eaten regularly.  Sugar can
also cause tooth decay.  Try and include low sugar puddings, snacks and drinks
e.g. sugar free jelly and sugar free squash.
6. Drinks:  The ideal drinks which should be consumed throughout the day are
water and sugar free drinks.  Aim for 6 - 8 glasses each day.  A 200ml serving of
pure fruit juice would count as one portion of fruit per day.  Excessive squash
intake can sometimes be associated with loose bowels movements and poor
eating habits.
Example of a day’s menu
Breakfast: Breakfast cereal with milk, glass fruit juice or baked
beans on toast
Mid-morning snack:  Portion fruit/low fat pretzels
Lunch:  Wholemeal bread sandwich with tuna and salad, diet
yogurt, fruit
Mid-afternoon snack:  Slice of malt loaf or fruit scone
Page 3 of 3
Evening meal:  Family meal e.g. spaghetti bolognaise or roast
dinner
Bedtime snack:  Diet yogurt or portion of fruit
Don’t forget exercise…
Teenagers should be doing at least 60 minutes of exercise per day plus 2 hours of
sport in school and 2 hours out of school.  This means you should ideally join a
sports club where you can also make friends, or do activities with your friends such
as going on bike rides, walks or swimming.  Daily activities such as walking to
school/college and shops are both great ways to start getting active.
Exercise is not only really important for our health but it is also great for making us
feel better – try it if you feel tired after a day at school or college.  Go for a walk or
bike ride, you will feel much more energised when you get back!
Useful links
www.bbcgoodfood.com/howto/guide/healthy-eating-what-adolescence-need
www.nutrition.org.uk/life-stages/teenagers/healthy-lifestyles-for-teenagers/top-
healthy-eating-tips-for-teenagers
Reproduced with permission from Norfolk and Norwich NHS Foundation Trust
If you would like any information regarding access to the West Suffolk Hospital and
its facilities please visit the website for AccessAble (formerly DisabledGo)
© West Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust