Recommended citation: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Population
Affairs, Adolescent Development Explained. Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing
This document is available at: opa.hhs.gov/adolescent-health/adolescent-development-explained
ADOLESCENCE IS A TIME OF ENORMOUS TRANSITION
Although adolescence may appear to be a turbulent time, it’s also a period of great potential
as young people engage more deeply with the world around them.  Adolescents typically
grow physically, try new activities, begin to think more critically, and develop more varied
This document examines the major
developmental changes that occur in
adolescence and provides suggestions
on how parents and caring adults can
support young people as they navigate
through this critical period.
It builds on The Teen Years Explained:
A Guide to Healthy Adolescent
Development, the seminal report
developed by the Center for Adolescent
Health at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, as well as on
other important sources of information.
The document focuses specifically on five
areas of adolescent development:
changes in the way
changes in familial, social,
their place in the world
It’s important to note that these five
areas often overlap and intersect.
For instance, adolescents who are
struggling with depression and/or
anxiety also can experience problems
with their schoolwork, parents, peers,
and physical health, and may lose
interest in activities they used to
enjoy. Adults need to understand this
complexity, respond in a supportive
way, and seek professional help for
such adolescents, if needed.
For each of the five areas of
professionals will learn about:
Changes that are a normal and
necessary part of adolescence
changes and reasons for this
How adults can support
and development by guiding
young people and helping
them build the skills they
need to thrive in the future
PARENTS AND OTHER ADULTS
Parents and other adults who care for and work with adolescents need to learn about
adolescent development and continuously educate themselves about the realities of
adolescent lives today. Teens’ lives are complex, can change quickly, and can present
issues that did not exist (e.g., social media) or were not fully acknowledged (e.g.,
mental health disorders) for prior generations of adolescents. If parents and caring
adults understand the challenges and opportunities that adolescents face today, they
can provide more effective support and encouragement for the young people in their
professional and personal lives.
Although some of the physical
changes that happen during
adolescence are internal and not
visible, others can be seen easily
by others. These obvious changes
in the body can affect how adults
and peers of both sexes view and
The changes that occur both
inside and outside the body during
adolescence happen through a
This process stems from the release of certain hormones (chemicals) in the brain. These
hormones released are the same in all adolescents, but differences in hormone levels
lead to different results in males and females. The physical changes in adolescents shift
them from their childhood bodies to their adult bodies and give them the ability to get
pregnant or cause pregnancy. This ability to get pregnant or cause pregnancy is called
Anyone who looks at an adolescent male
and female side by side will see some clear
differences. Still, adolescents of both
sexes exhibit many changes in common,
most notably, growth spurts in height and
weight. During these growth spurts, bones
and muscles get longer and stronger,
which allows adolescents to take on tasks
they were likely not able to do as younger
children, such as lifting heavy objects and
walking, running, or biking long distances.
Many young people will reach their
full adult height by the end of puberty.
Beyond the growth spurts, other physical
changes that happen in both males and
females include body odor, acne, and
As noted, many of the physical changes in adolescence are related to fertility. Some
adolescents may be embarrassed by these changes at first, but they need to know that
they happen to everyone. Consider this short list:
Females will see changes in where fat
appears on their body. For example,
breasts become fuller and hips grow
wider. Females typically experience
their first menstruation (or period)
during adolescence. Early on, periods
can be irregular and affected by
illness, stress, and even exercise.
Males’ shoulders become broader and
their muscles get bigger. The penis
and testicles also grow, and males
will begin to experience erections
and ejaculations, both voluntary and
while asleep). Males’ voices also
deepen during this time and may
crack during the shift.
Beyond developing fertility, these visible sex-specific changes also let others know that
a person is no longer a child. It is important to note that while the physical changes that
adolescents experience happen to everyone, the timing and order of these changes will
vary from person to person.
UNIQUE ISSUES IN PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT
Although the major physical development milestones of adolescence happen to
everyone, the timing of these milestones varies a lot, both between and within the
sexes. Some adolescents exhibit physical signs of maturity sooner than their peers,
and others exhibit them later.
For example, the visible physical changes in males often begin a couple of years
after they begin in females. The timing of a female’s first period also varies: girls
can start their period as early as eight and as late as 16.
These differences can be hard for
adolescents: they may feel self-
conscious, or worry that they don’t fit
in if they don’t look like others their
age. These variations also can lead to
other people treating adolescents in a
way that does not match their cognitive
or emotional development. For
instance, females who develop visible
curves or males whose voices change
during middle school may be treated
more like older teenagers by both their
peers and adults, even if they do not have the cognitive or emotional maturity of older
teenagers. In contrast, adolescents who exhibit physical changes later than their peers
may be treated like younger children, even though they are more mature cognitively and
Some research suggests that youth who experience faster physical development are more
likely to engage in risk-taking behavior than their peers and that teens who develop more
slowly than their peers may be more likely to face bullying.
Many factors can be responsible for differences in the timing and results of adolescents’
physical changes, such as:
A person’s genetic makeup can affect the timing of puberty
and what the changes look like.
EXERCISE BEFORE AND DURING ADOLESCENCE
Overweight females, for example, are more likely to have their
first period and experience breast development at younger ages
Conditions such as cystic fibrosis, asthma, diabetes, or
bowel problems also can contribute to delays in growth and
puberty because of nutrient deficiencies, toxin excess, and/or
Smoking or using other drugs can harm adolescents’ growth
and development. Smoking can stunt lung growth and make it
harder to grow strong bones.
DEVELOPMENT IN OTHER AREAS
Variations in cognitive, emotional, social, and/or moral
development also can influence development.
HOW PARENTS AND CARING ADULTS CAN SUPPORT
Here are some ways that parents and other caring adults can support adolescents
through these physical changes:
Let adolescents know that what they
are going through is normal. Although
“normal” development covers a
wide range, even older adolescents
(and sometimes, their parents) are
concerned with “fitting in.” Remind
teens that despite their concerns, their
personal developmental path is okay,
even if it is different from their peers.
Help adolescents eat well. Parents
and other adults play a large
role in adolescents’ nutrition, by
modeling healthy eating, following
dietary guidelines, and making sure
adolescents have access to healthy
foods. Keeping healthy snacks at
home and limiting junk food goes
a long way to promoting solid
Encourage adolescents to have a
positive view of their bodies. Beyond
reassuring that the timing of changes
in the body varies from person to
person, parents and caring adults
can help adolescents appreciate
their own bodies and developmental
Get active with adolescents. As with
healthy eating, parents and caring
adults can model physical activity,
making it easier for adolescents to
avoid becoming “couch potatoes.” If
able, parents can go on walks or bike
rides with their adolescent or just
toss around a ball.
Teach adolescents to avoid drugs.
It’s important for parents to talk to
adolescents about how smoking and
other drug use can hurt their health
and keep them from growing strong
and to lead by example. Check out the
National Institute on Drug Abuse for
Teens website for more information.
Make sure adolescents get enough
sleep. Sleep helps adolescents grow
and strengthen their bodies and
perform better in school, sports,
and other activities. Strategies for
parents include having a “lights out”
rule and limiting the number of
electronic devices (e.g., cell phone,
“The teen’s brain is wired for learning.”
- Frances Jensen, M.D.
Cognitive development refers to changes in the brain that prepare people to think and learn.
Just as in early childhood, brains in adolescence undergo a lot of growth and development. These
changes will reinforce adolescents’ abilities to make and carry out decisions that will help them
thrive now and in the future. The brain grows and strengthens itself in three ways:
Growing new brain cells. Adolescence is one of the few times in which the
brain produces a large number of cells at a very fast rate. In fact, the brain creates
many more cells than will be needed. The extra brain cells give adolescents more
places to store information, which helps them learn new skills.
Pruning some of the extra growth. The disadvantage of having extra brain
cells is that they also decrease the brain’s efficiency. As adolescents go to school,
live, and work, the brain trims down the extra growth based on the parts of the
brain the adolescent actively uses. This pruning process creates a brain structure
than enables adolescents to easily access the information they use most.
Strengthening connections. The connections between brain cells are
what enable the information stored in the brain to be used in daily life. The brain
strengthens these connections by wrapping a special fatty tissue around the cells
to protect and insulate them. These changes help adolescents recall information
and use it efficiently.
As fast as the changes happen, these processes take time. Different sections of the
brain develop at different times, with the part of the brain responsible for abstract
thinking, planning, and decision making developing last. Overall, the brain is not fully
developed and protected until people are in their mid-twenties.
The changes in the adolescent brain affect adolescents’ thinking skills. Specifically,
young people gain these advantages as the brain grows, prunes, and strengthens
Young children mostly understand only
things that can be seen or touched.
They may understand a portion of
abstract ideas, such as love, justice, or
fractions, but their understanding is of
limited scope. As the brain develops
in adolescence, a young person gains a
broader understanding of more abstract
Children generally have limited reasoning
that focuses on the information at hand.
In contrast, adolescents can predict the
results of their actions by using logic to
imagine multiple options and different
situations. This new ability helps young
people plan for their future and consider
how their choices will affect that future.
Another new skill adolescents develop
is “thinking about thinking”— or
metacognition. This practice enables youth
to reflect on how they came to an answer
or conclusion. This new skill also helps
adolescents think about how they learn
best and find ways to improve how they
New synapses, or gaps between nerve
cells through which impulses are
transmitted, make the adolescent brain
a learning machine that can absorb facts,
Adolescence is an ideal time in a person’s
life to gain and maintain new skills. The
changes in the brain and how they shape
a young person’s thinking help prepare
adolescents for adult decision-making.
Still, parents and other caring adults
should remember that the teen brain is
not fully developed. In particular, teens
may struggle with impulse control and
may be more likely to make decisions
based on emotions than on logic. In
addition, an adolescent’s thinking and
decision-making processes may vary
from day to day. By keeping these
issues in mind, adults can provide the
support adolescents need as their
UNIQUE ISSUES IN COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT
Cognitive development, much like physical development, happens at a different pace
for every adolescent. As a result, adolescents of the same age may not have the same
thinking and reasoning skills. Additionally, brain development occurs at a different rate
than physical development, which means that an adolescent’s thinking may not match
the adolescent’s appearance. Here are some other factors that affect how adolescents’
brains develop and how adolescents think:
Learning styles and multiple intelligences. Every adolescent learns
and processes information in a different way. Adolescents may find that
some academic subjects are easier for them to learn or are more interesting
than others. Education theories suggest that presenting information and
assessing learning in multiple ways helps young people with different learning
Disabilities. A learning disability—such as auditory processing disorder,
dyslexia, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)—can affect
cognitive development. Challenges will differ based on the disability, but
being aware of the issues can help adults link adolescents to the proper
tools and resources so they can thrive. Furthermore, under the federal law,
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), K-12 public schools must
provide accommodations for students with disabilities, including learning
disabilities. Parents also can support their children’s special learning. College
students with disabilities can obtain supports through the Americans with
Trauma. For some adolescents, brain development might be more
difficult because of earlier or ongoing trauma. The brain reacts to the
environment. Experiencing violence, neglect, or abuse can stunt brain
growth. Being aware of trauma and its potential impact, whether in early
childhood or in adolescence, and helping adolescents cope, can go a long
way in improving young people’s well-being.
Mental health disorders. Many mental health disorders first appear
during adolescence, in part because of changes in physical brain
development. An adolescent struggling with mental health challenges may
have decreased motivation and have a harder time with cognitive tasks,
such as planning and decision-making. Adults can support adolescents
by watching out for mental health warning signs and providing teens who
face mental health challenges with treatment.
Substance use. Substance use can greatly hinder adolescents’ potential
by slowing and stunting brain development. The brain also is especially
vulnerable to addiction at this stage of life. Use of alcohol, tobacco, and
drugs in the teen years is associated with increased risk for adult substance
use disorders. In contrast, if teens abstain from certain substances (such
as tobacco), they are less likely to use these substances as adults.
One of the biggest changes and challenges in
adolescence is an increase in risk-taking. Cognitive
development during adolescence predisposes young
people to take more risks than adults, and taking
risks is an important part of growing up. Trying
new things gives adolescents the chance to have
experiences that will help them make the transition
to their independent adult lives, such as finding a
career, starting their own family, or moving to new
As adolescents’ brains develop and new cognitive
skills emerge, the ability to reason and think
through consequences takes a leap forward. In
fact, adolescents can even match adults’ abilities in
assessing risk, but adolescents do not always make
the healthiest decisions because factors other than
risk assessment, such as their emotions or the social
rewards, come into play. Adults can help protect
adolescents from unhealthy risks by being aware of
these factors and creating environments that guide
young people to healthy choices:
Because the back of the adolescent brain
develops before the front, the parts of the
brain that handle rewards form stronger
connections before the parts that manage
impulse control. This gap means that even
if adolescents know the risks for the future,
they may still place a higher value on a short-
term reward. For example, if a young person
attends a party where there is drinking, he or
she may understand the risk of underage or
binge drinking but value the reward of social
Another element that affects adolescent
decisions is whether they have to make a
choice in a “hot” or “cold” environment.
A “hot cognition” situation is one in which
a decision needs to be made quickly or in
the heat of the moment. A “cold cognition”
situation is one in which adolescents have
time to reflect and weigh their options. Hot
cognition environments also tend to have
more emotions tied to them. Adults can help
adolescents to make positive decisions by
encouraging them to think through situations
in cold cognition environments and practice
what to do in the heat of the moment.
Adolescents vary in how much risk they want
to take. Some adolescents consciously seek
out sensations, meaning that they greatly
enjoy new, stimulating experiences and look
for them. Looking for these experiences
does not make them bad at decision-making
or suggest that they will turn to negative
health behaviors. Adults can support these
adolescents by providing them with positive
opportunities that challenge and stimulate
HOW PARENTS AND CARING ADULTS CAN
Ask open-ended questions on complex
issues. Adolescents are eager to improve
their abstract thinking skills. Asking probing
questions, such as, “What did you think
about [x event]?” or “How would you have
approached [y situation] differently?”
and following up with an adolescent in a
nonjudgmental manner can jump start an
adolescent’s reasoning and abstract thinking
skills. Adults can further engage adolescents
in developing aspects of higher cognition
by giving them opportunities to plan and
organize events. For example, a parent may
ask an adolescent to plan a specific family
Provide more learning opportunities that
entail healthy risks. Taking risks can be
healthy and promote growth. Healthy risks
can include trying a new activity such as a new
sport or art project, taking challenging classes,
or getting involved with the community.
Encouraging healthy risks and distinguishing
them from negative risks (like substance use
or driving dangerously) can give adolescents
skills needed to assess and cope with risk.
Help adolescents consider consequences of
actions at multiple time points. Adolescents
sometimes have difficulty weighing future
risks versus immediate rewards, especially
in the heat of the moment. By asking
adolescents to think through the pros and
cons of various actions both in the short term
and long term, adults can help adolescents to
improve their future-thinking capacity. For
example, ask an adolescent to think about
the benefits and drawbacks of staying up late
with friends versus going to sleep earlier on a
Encourage healthy sleep habits. Adolescents
need a lot of sleep so their brains can
function well. During sleep, the brain
aids in memory and learning functions. A
good night’s rest also is associated with
improvements in focus and energy and is a
protective factor against depression, anxiety,
and substance use. Experts recommend that
teens get eight to 10 hours of sleep a night,
but less than 30 percent of high school
students report getting at least eight hours
Brain changes shift an adolescent’s sleep
cycle, and for many adolescents, it is hard
to fall asleep before 11 p.m. However, the
average school start time is at 8 a.m. This
combination of staying up late and getting up
early makes it difficult for adolescents to get
the amount of rest they need. Parents can
help adolescents build healthy sleep habits by
setting routines and encouraging practices
such as limiting electronic devices in the
Promote injury prevention. Help adolescents
protect their brain during a time of rapid and
crucial development. Adolescents should be
encouraged to take safety precautions to
prevent concussions and other brain injuries.
These precautions include always wearing
a seatbelt when driving and a helmet when
participating in sports and outdoor activities
such as biking, skating, skiing, or rock-climbing.
Furthermore, if an adolescent does participate
in a team sport, parents, coaches, and other
caring adults should understand the risks and
learn how to spot potential brain injuries.
Seek out opportunities for teens to engage
as learners. A great way for adolescents to
learn and improve their cognitive abilities is
for them to look for opportunities to put their
new skills to the test in a leadership capacity.
Adolescents can find learning and leadership
activities that help them develop foresight,
vision, and planning skills through their schools,
extracurricular activities, communities, or
at home. Parents and other caring adults
can suggest different activities and facilitate
adolescents’ participation (e.g., by helping
them find a way to get to and from a club).
Support adolescents with learning
disabilities. If parents think an
adolescent is struggling academically,
they should make sure the adolescent is
screened. The earlier a professional can
the young person can receive assistance.
Furthermore, adults can work with
schools and healthcare providers to
make sure students with learning
disabilities have the skills and support
they need for success.
Healthy emotional development is marked
by a gradually increasing ability to perceive,
assess, and manage emotions. This is a biological
process driven by physical and cognitive
changes and heavily influenced by context
and environment. The process of emotional
development gives adolescents the opportunity
to build skills, discover unique qualities, and
develop strengths for optimal health.
Factors that affect how well adolescents
navigate this process include:
By managing their own emotions, adolescents
can establish positive goals and gain foresight
into how their emotions can influence their
goals and futures. To improve their ability to
manage emotions, adolescents must first learn
to recognize and describe strong, complex
emotions. Although young people learn to
describe basic emotions earlier in life, as they
get older they develop an ability to truly grasp
what emotions are and understand their impact.
When adolescents can recognize how they
feel, they can choose how they will react to a
situation. They also learn to avoid the problems
that strong emotions sometimes cause.
However, because the brain’s frontal lobe—
which is responsible for reasoning, planning,
and problem-solving as well as emotions—
doesn’t fully develop until the mid-twenties,
adolescents may find it difficult to manage their
emotions and think through the consequences
of their actions. Over time and with the support
of parents and helpful adults, adolescents can
develop the reasoning and abstract thinking
skills that enable them to step back, examine
their emotions, and consider consequences
These critical chemicals in the brain that
bring about physical changes also affect
adolescents’ moods and heighten their
emotional responses. These characteristics
together mean that teens are more
easily swayed by emotion and have
difficulty making decisions that adults find
appropriate. Adolescence also is a time of
rapid and sometimes stressful changes in
peer relationships, school expectations,
family dynamics, and safety concerns in
The body responds to stress by activating
specific hormones and activities in the
nervous system so that the person can
respond quickly and perform well under
pressure. The stress response kicks in more
quickly for adolescents than it does for
adults whose brains are fully developed and
can moderate a stress response. Not all
stressors are bad. Positive experiences such
as landing a first job or getting a driver’s
permit can trigger a stress response that
enables adolescents to approach a challenge
with alertness and focus.
Physical changes increase adolescents’
capacity for emotional awareness, self-
management, and empathy, but emotional
development is strongly influenced by
context. This means that many aspects
of adolescents’ lives can influence their
emotional development. Among these
How people feel about themselves—
or the way they perceive their own
talents, characteristics, and life
experiences—can affect their sense of
their own worth. An adolescent’s self-
esteem can be influenced by approval
from family, support from friends, and
personal successes. Research shows that
adolescents with a positive self-concept
experience greater academic success
than do adolescents who lack this quality.
Concerns about body image also are
common and can provide opportunities for
parents, teachers, and other caring adults
to teach self-care, offer encouragement,
and reinforce a positive body image.
For some adolescents, the concern
for body image is extreme and—when
combined with other warning signs—
may indicate an eating disorder. Eating
disorders are one type of mental health
problem among adolescents. However,
feeling good about oneself does not
necessarily protect against risky
behaviors. Therefore, it is still important
to limit adolescents’ exposure to risky
situations and empower young people
to make healthy choices when they
inevitably come across such a situation.
There are many facets to identity
formation, which includes developmental
tasks such as becoming independent
and achieving a sense of competence.
Adolescents may question their passions
and values, examine their relationships
with family and peers, and think about
their talents and definitions of success.
Identity formation is an iterative process
during which adolescents repeatedly
experiment with different ideas, friends,
and activities. This experimentation is
normal and can provide adolescents
opportunities to learn more about
themselves and others, but it isn’t
always balanced with thoughtfulness
or a cognitive ability to consider the
consequences of their actions.
Although this path to finding one’s
identity can prove challenging for some
families, it also can motivate adolescents
to learn about themselves and become
more confident in their own, unique
Adolescents live in a variety of environments
and experience a wide range of stressors
that affect emotional development. Learning
healthy responses to stressful situations
is part of normal development, and some
stress can even be positive. However, some
adolescents face particularly traumatic
events, such as experiencing or witnessing
physical or sexual abuse or school violence.
Some of these events are prolonged or
recurring, such as chronic neglect or being
bullied. Some adolescents also have to deal
with multiple types of traumatic stress.
These more extreme forms of stress, often
referred to as toxic stress, can weaken an
adolescent’s immune system, resulting
in chronic physical health problems and
potentially leading to depression, anxiety,
and other mental health disorders. Toxic
stress also can lead to stress-related
diseases and cognitive impairment
in adulthood. Adolescents who
experience this form of stress also are
more likely to use harmful substances,
engage in other risky behaviors,  and
disorder (PTSD), a condition in
which a person relives a traumatic
event through persistent memories
or flashbacks and experiences other
symptoms such as insomnia, angry
outbursts, or feeling tense. However,
people respond to stress differently,
and a strong support system can
help protect adolescents from long-
lasting negative effects and create an
environment that enables youth to
HOW PARENTS AND CARING ADULTS CAN SUPPORT
Parents and other adults can support positive emotional development and help youth
thrive by modeling healthy behaviors. This means that it is important to:
Make your own emotional well-being a priority. You may find it helpful
to join a parent group where you can safely navigate your feelings with people
who understand your point of view.
Practice healthy goal-setting. Let go of ideas of perfection for adolescents
and yourself. Set realistic goals and break them into smaller tasks that are
easier to manage. When you come up against an obstacle or experience a
failure, focus on what you can control, and let go of the things that you cannot.
Value every adolescent’s unique identity. Even when you don’t relate to
an adolescent’s feelings or experiences, your understanding and respect as a
parent or caring adult goes a long way.
Resolve conflicts with respect for others. When you disagree with
someone, focus on resolving the issue at hand instead of assigning blame. Take
time to cool off and think things through when you start to feel overwhelmed.
Family conflicts can be especially stressful given the intense emotions and
relationship dynamics at play.
Manage your anger. Practicing relaxation exercises and using humor to diffuse
a tense situation are a couple strategies you can use to manage your anger. Seek
professional help if you are unsure of what to do.
Parents and other adults also can support the development of adolescents’ skills that
facilitate emotional development by taking steps to:
Many lessons about relationships
and emotions start with the parent-
child relationship. Effective and
open communication lies at the
heart of this relationship. Strong
communication skills include being
an attentive listener, sharing your
experiences instead of lecturing, and
Nurture self-regulation skills. Provide
opportunities for adolescents to
understand, express, and moderate their
own feelings and behaviors. This step
involves modeling self-regulation, creating
a warm and responsive environment,
establishing consequences for poor
decisions, and reducing the emotional
Build emotional vocabulary. State your
feelings and discuss how other people
may feel in a nonjudgmental way.
Point out nonverbal cues such as body
language when discussing emotions.
Ask your teen, “How did you feel about
that?” and “How do you think that
made the other person feel?”
Help teens think carefully about risky
situations. After a risky event, ask
adolescents, “Why do you think this
happened?” and “What could you do
differently next time?” It may take them a
long time to fully process their experiences
so give them to time to think about the
Promote stress management skills.
Encourage adolescents to handle stress in
healthy ways. Daily management strategies
include getting adequate sleep, staying
active with exercise and hobbies, practicing
deep breathing, and eating regular meals.
Teach adolescents to “mind their brain” by
talking about adolescent brain development
and letting them know how they can use
the power of their brains to learn healthy
Pay attention to warning signs. Adolescents
may show signs of stress, anxiety, or
depression such as increased irritability or
anger, changing sleeping and eating habits,
dropping favorite activities, or feelings of
loneliness. Resources are available to those
experiencing an emotional crisis. If you are
concerned about an adolescent’s well-being,
consult your healthcare provider or mental
health professional. An adolescent may also
call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline
Limit exposure to risky situations. When
faced with a decision, emotions may
intermingle with recollections of what
might have happened in the past. Prepare
adolescents for risky situations by talking
about what they can do to anticipate, avoid,
The process of social development
moves adolescents from the limited
roles of childhood to the broader roles
of adulthood. For young people, this
Expanding their social circles. Young children mostly spend time with their
family. Their social circle expands slightly as they enter school. By the time they
reach adolescence, their networks also can include people from team sports, student
organizations, jobs, and other activities. As their social circles expand, adolescents
spend less time with their families and may focus more on their peers. Young people
also develop a greater capacity to form stronger relationships with adults outside of
their families who may function as mentors.
Expanding their social roles. The changes adolescents experience in their brain,
emotions, and bodies prime them to take on more complex social roles. Cognitive and
emotional development work together to help adolescents have deeper conversations
and express their emotions better. Physical development signals that adolescents are
becoming adults and that they may become entrusted with greater responsibility.
Adolescents may assume new roles, such as taking on a leadership position in school,
on a team, or at church; serving as a confidante; or being a romantic partner.
Building new connections and establishing identities
outside of the context of the family is a normal part
of healthy development. Interacting with people
outside of the family circle can teach adolescents
how to maintain healthy relationships in different
contexts and identify roles they can play in the
broader community. Still, it is important to remember
that adolescents will need support as they experience
these new roles. Engaging in role-playing and
rehearsing strategies modeled by peer and adult
mentors may help adolescents practice cooperation,
communication, problem-solving, and decision-making
skills, as well as tactics to resist peer pressure.
One aspect of social development that
promotes having a broad social network is
the tendency of adolescents to become
more aware of how other people feel. The
ability to empathize and to appreciate the
unique differences among people increases
in adolescence. Adolescents often learn to
take other people’s feelings into account, be
compassionate about the suffering of others,
listen actively, and interpret nonverbal cues.
Although youth typically begin to express
some complex emotions early in life,
adolescents start to examine their inner
experiences and express their emotions
verbally. However, because the prefrontal
cortex is not fully developed until early
adulthood, adolescents often find it
challenging to interpret body language and
facial expressions. As the prefrontal cortex
develops and the capacity for abstract
thinking grows, adolescents will be able to
empathize more deeply with others.
UNIQUE ISSUES IN SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
The way adolescents develop socially
largely depends on their environment.
For example, some youth live in
neighborhoods and attend schools where
violence is relatively common. These
adolescents must develop different
coping strategies than do those who
live in neighborhoods with more
physical security. Some adolescents also
experience trauma. These experiences
can evoke stress reactions across all
Some survivors of trauma have difficulty
regulating emotions, sleeping, eating,
and acting on or making decisions
(See page 16 for more information on
stress). In any case, all adolescents need
caring adults in their lives who offer
them support, provide opportunities
for them to test their new skills, and
offer guidance on how to be successful.
The key role that environment plays
in adolescent development means that
adolescents of the same age will differ
greatly in their ability to handle diverse
Here are some other factors that differ among adolescents and can affect their
VARYING RATES OF PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT
Adolescents’ bodies change and develop at different rates, and this process does not
always happen in sync with other areas of development. For instance, those who
develop physically at a relatively young age may be seen and treated more like adults
or they may end up spending more time with older youth because of how they look, a
pattern that increases their potential for engaging in sexual relationships.
However, these more mature-looking adolescents may not be emotionally and
cognitively ready to handle those new roles.  On the other hand, adolescents who
develop later may be seen and treated more like young children.
EVOLVING GROUPS OF FRIENDS
Acceptance by a peer group is crucial to adolescents, especially those who
are younger. Seeking acceptance might spur them to change the way they
think, speak, dress, and behave to make them feel they belong to the group.
As a result, younger adolescents tend to hang out with peers who are
similar to them (e.g., same race, ethnicity, family income, religion, or class
schedule). Older adolescents may branch out to other groups as their social
worlds diversify and expand.
DIFFERING TYPES OF PEER PRESSURE
Peer pressure sometimes gets a bad reputation. The stereotype about this pressure
stems from perceptions of delinquent and risky behaviors, including sexual activity
and substance use, which some adolescents think will earn them greater acceptance
among their peers. However, peer pressure can be beneficial, and peer relationships
can be largely positive. Positive peer groups practice behaviors such as cooperating,
sharing, resolving conflicts, and supporting others. The accepted standards, or
norms, of positive peer groups can help adolescents build relationship skills, hold
favorable views of themselves, and have the confidence to take positive risks.
Changing ways to interact
As with all technologies, using social media carries both potential risks and
potential benefits for adolescents. Text messaging, social networking platforms,
blogs, email, and instant messaging can help adolescents stay connected to each
other, and express who they are to the world. Today’s adolescents have such large
social networks that it is not uncommon to have virtual friendships with peers
they have never met face-to-face. This digital interaction may curtail nonverbal
communication and cues that occur in person that are important for developing
social skills; but these interactions are still social and meaningful to the adolescents
who participate in them. At the same time, technology and social media have also
provided a new forum for harassment. In addition to the 20 percent of high school
percent reported being bullied online.
HOW PARENTS AND CARING ADULTS CAN SUPPORT SOCIAL
Although adolescence is a time when young people
try to manage their lives on their own, they still
depend on their families and caring adults for
primary support, affection, and decision-making,
as well as for help establishing their identities and
learning about skills and values. Here are some ways
parents and other adults can support youth thriving
SET EXAMPLES OF HEALTHY RELATIONSHIPS
Relationships can be strong when you’re aware of your own feelings as
well as aware of other’s emotions. In healthy relationships, both partners
should treat each other with respect, give each other space, talk through
problems, and communicate honestly. Modeling positive friendships and
relationships with co-workers and neighbors also is important.
MONITOR AND GET TO KNOW ADOLESCENTS’ FRIENDS AND DATING PARTNERS
Find out whom they spend time with, what they are doing, and where
they are going. Ask about how the adolescent picks their friends and what
they enjoy about the people with whom they spend their time.
ENCOURAGE PARTICIPATION IN ACTIVITIES ADOLESCENTS CARE ABOUT
Help adolescents make friends by getting them involved in activities that
match their interests (e.g. art, music, computer science, sports).
Show empathy by acting on concern for other people, using statements
that describe how people might feel, and talking about being
compassionate toward diverse groups of people. Adults and adolescents
also can work together on community service projects.
BUILD CONNECTIONS BY TALKING TO ADOLESCENTS ABOUT YOUR INTERESTS
AND LEARN ABOUT THEIRS
Take the time to learn about your adolescent’s hobbies and interests and
expose them to new activities to help you find mutual interests and have
TEACH ADOLESCENTS HOW TO DEAL WITH PEER PRESSURE
Help adolescents understand which risks will enable them to test their
skills and which risks may have harmful consequences, even if their peers
Parents and other adults can help answer young people’s questions about their changing
social worlds and relationships. Have open and honest conversations with adolescents to
help them make healthy decisions about their social development.
Acknowledge what adolescents have
to say. Not every disagreement is a
conflict. Be available to listen to any
concerns adolescents disclose. Meaningful
conversations may happen informally and
Discuss boundaries and expectations in
relationships with friends and romantic
partners. Stress the importance of
having personal space, setting limits, and
respecting privacy in any relationship.
Discuss what true friendships and
romantic relationships are (respectful,
supportive, encouraging, and caring) as
well as what they are not (disrespectful,
abusive, controlling, and violent).
Acknowledge that friends and romantic
partners can remain close and intimate
even if they say “no” to each other.
Set online boundaries. A large
part of social development now
occurs while adolescents are online.
Whether social media acts as a
risk or a tool for adolescent health
largely depends on how adolescents
use the media and how parents
talk with teens about online safety.
Talk to adolescents about behaving
responsibly online, both in how they
treat others and how they can keep
Teach and model good
a conversation, especially on
sensitive topics, can be challenging.
Respectful communication is a
learned skill. Showing adolescents
how to listen and share their
thoughts and feelings respectfully,
even in the midst of conflict, can
help them socially, romantically,
Let adolescents know when it
is important to share sensitive
information with you.  Make sure
teens know they can come to you
with information that affects their
safety or the safety of their peers
without fear of being judged or
GENERAL CHANGES IN VALUES ADOLESCENTS EXPERIENCE
Adolescence is a time when changes in the brain encourage young people to think
about the world more deeply and in a more abstract way. This thinking helps shape
how adolescents see the world, how they choose to interact with it, and how they
begin to develop the morals and values that will play out in their adult lives.
Some of the most common changes in thinking about morals and values that occur
during this life stage include:
SEEING THE WORLD IN SHADES OF GRAY
Adolescents begin to understand that not every question has a
clear-cut answer. As they develop empathy, they begin to see
why other people make different choices and to understand
UNDERSTANDING THE REASONS BEHIND RULES
Abstract thinking means adolescents can sense more fully how
rules are related to ideas such as justice, public good, and safety.
This knowledge also means that they may push back more on
the issue of why rules exist. Children may be okay when parents
and other adults say “because it’s the law” or “because I said so”
as answers to their questions, but adolescents may need more
justification for curfews, limits, or other rules.
FORMING THEIR MORAL CODE
The questions and debates adolescents raise about rules are
normal and helpful. The reasons and logic adults provide help
adolescents form their views of the world and how it works.
When adolescents get answers that satisfy their questions
about a rule, it becomes personal to them, and they are better
able to see why a rule makes sense.
BECOMING MORE INTERESTED IN BIG QUESTIONS
As part of establishing their values, adolescents may think
more about what is right and what is wrong, what their role
should be in the world, and what they should do when faced
with personal moral dilemmas. They may spend time exploring
their own religious traditions more deeply, as well as looking at
other religions, philosophies, and forms of spirituality.
While it may be true that
adolescents no longer think like
children, they still need time
and support to process new ideas
and ways of thinking. As part of
this process, adolescents often
question and challenge rules
and those in authority. When
evaluate answers, and explore new
ideas, they are practicing their new
thinking and emotional abilities.
This practice in abstract thinking
helps prepare them for making
complex, concrete decisions in
The process of setting values
also can push adolescents to get
involved with causes of interest
to them and to become connected
with the wider community. This
connection to the larger world can
help adolescents make positive
choices that protect their health
UNIQUE ISSUES IN MORAL DEVELOPMENT
As with other types of development,
adolescents vary in when, how
much, and how fast they establish
and change their morals and values.
This variation also is affected by
how much they have changed and
mastered skills in other areas.
and social development all can have
an impact on how adolescents shape
their morals and values.
Adolescents’ thoughts and emotions
also can vary across different events
so that the same person will react
to similar situations in completely
different ways. This inconsistency
is normal, and in many cases,
good. The more adolescents think
through their response to different
events, the more they can build
their decision-making skills. When
faced with a choice, values can
shape whether a person is aware
of a problem, how they organize
information about a situation, what
solutions they think of, and how
they weigh different results.
Adolescent moral and values development, and consequently young peoples’
worldview and approach to different situations, is based on their personality
and prior experiences. For instance:
Some adolescents may connect
more easily with issues in the
wider world and be moved by
events that happen across the
globe, whereas others may focus
more on issues affecting their
may shape their worldview. Some
research shows that in addition to
tools like cognitive therapy and
care, religion and spirituality can
help a person cope with trauma.
Adolescents may differ in their
level of optimism, as well as in
how much they consider things
from a practical or idealistic
Family members are often a
person’s first teachers for how
the world works, setting cultural
Adolescents’ values are formed
by interactions with parents
and other adults, peers, schools,
religious groups, the media, the
internet, and other institutions.
As adolescents experience a
range of views, they learn to
reflect on, question, and refine
Ideally, youth would only make
choices that match where they
are in their development.
mean that some youth face more
complex decisions than what they
feel ready to tackle. In these
cases, parents and other caring
adults can play an especially vital
role in providing guidance.
Beyond the different experiences described above, adolescents also differ
in the types of choices they face. Some teens may have faced these choices
at a younger age, while others may be confronting them for the first time.
Examples of these choices (or dilemmas) include:
Keeping some things private by
not posting to social media versus
posting to gain acceptance by
Finding time to follow through on
commitments, such as schoolwork
or being engaged in an activity,
while also taking care of one’s
health (e.g., getting adequate
Getting a job or taking up a
leadership position during one’s
Giving friends honest feedback
or staying quiet to spare their
Debating an issue online with a
friend or acquaintance versus
HOW PARENTS AND CARING ADULTS CAN SUPPORT
The process of moral and values
development in adolescence not only
helps adolescents become engaged
in society, it also supports optimal
health. For example, research has
linked faith-based participation and
spirituality with positive social ties,
higher self-esteem, and lower rates
During this time of questioning,
adolescents often want to talk to
parents and other adults such as
coaches, teachers, and counselors.
The four in five adolescents who
attend religious services at least
once a year may look to their faith
tradition for supportive adults.
No matter what your role in young people’s lives, these tips can help you
create a space where youth can thrive.
TALK HONESTLY AND OPENLY
Even though it may not always
seem like it, teens do care about
what their adult role models think
and appreciate when parents and
other adults are “real” with them.
You don’t need to wait for them to
come to you to start a conversation.
The news, TV shows, movies, and
other media can be conversation
starters. Sharing your story about
how different life events shaped you
helps adolescents process their own
LISTEN AND DON’T JUDGE
When adolescents share their
concerns, they are making
themselves vulnerable to your
opinion. Listening to them and
treating their questions as valid will
help them feel safe and also will
make it more likely that they will
continue coming to you for advice.
You can let teens know that it’s
okay to make mistakes.
THE RESULTS OF THEIR ACTIONS
A valuable part of risk-taking
is that adolescents experience
some of the results of their
actions. As a parent or caring
adult, it may be necessary to
try and reduce the harm that
can come from an adolescent’s
choices (e.g., to prevent serious
injury). Still, having an accurate
and full picture of the results of
their actions helps adolescents
make decisions in the future.
negative outcomes, you can
help them think through a new
approach for the next time.
Adolescents are curious about
how their values and ideals fit in
with those of other people. One
way they can explore this is by
talking and working directly
with people of other ages and
can get to know other views
through music, art, books,
poems, movies, and plays. Being
comfortable with seeing and
thinking about new ideas, even
if they never adopt them, can
help adolescents respect others’
Additional information on adolescent development can be found in The Teen Years Explained: A
Guide to Healthy Adolescent Development, produced by the Center for Adolescent Health at the
Arain, M., Haque, M., Johal, L., Mathur, P., Nel, W., Rais, A., Sharma, S.
Treatment, 9, 449-461. doi:10.2147/NDT.S39776
Kann, L., McManus, T., Harris, W. A., Shanklin, S. L., Flint, K. H., Queens,
Arain, M., Haque, M., Johal, L., Mathur, P., Nel, W., Rais, A., &
Theory, evidence and practice. Child and adolescent mental health, 8(2),
Understanding the impact of trauma. In TIP 57: Trauma-Informed Care in
outcomes associated with early pubertal timing in adolescent girls. Developmental
Washington, DC: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Division of
New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers