Provided for non-commercial research and educational use only.
Not for reproduction, distribution or commercial use.
This article was originally published in the International Encyclopedia of the Social
& Behavioral Sciences, 2nd edition, published by Elsevier, and the attached copy
is provided by Elsevier for the author’s benefit and for the benefit of the
author’s institution, for non-commercial research and educational use including
without limitation use in instruction at your institution, sending it to specific
colleagues who you know, and providing a copy to your institution’s administrator.
All other uses, reproduction and distribution, including
without limitation commercial reprints, selling or
licensing copies or access, or posting on open
internet sites, your personal or institution’s website or
repository, are prohibited. For exceptions, permission
may be sought for such use through Elsevier’s
permissions site at:
From Krapić, N., Hudek-Knežević, J., Kardum, I., 2015. Stress in
Adolescence: Effects on Development. In: James D. Wright (editor-in-chief), International
Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, 2nd edition, Vol 23. Oxford:
Elsevier. pp. 562–569.
ISBN: 9780080970868
Elsevier
Author's personal copy
Stress in Adolescence: Effects on Development
Nada Krapic, Jasna Hudek-Knezevic, and Igor Kardum, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia
Abstract
Adolescents frequently have to cope with various stressors that could be potential threats to their healthy development
and well-being. Most important mental health consequences of stress in adolescence, such as depression, anxiety,
suicide, substance use, and antisocial behavior are reviewed. Physiological mechanisms through which stress exerts its
effects on health, as well as some physical health outcomes, such as somatic symptoms, immune changes, and illnesses
(cancer, type 1 diabetes, and dermatological conditions) are described. Furthermore, the effects of cognitive appraisal,
coping, and social support as mediating and moderating factors between stress and various health outcomes also are
explained.
Adolescence is an important period of human development
characterized by neurobiological, hormonal, psychological,
and social changes. During this developmental period,
adolescents
have
cope
with
various
common
stressors, including physical and sexual changes related to
puberty, school life demands, problems with initiating and
maintaining friendships and romantic relationships, career
choice and beginnings of their working life, and a gradual
independence from their families. Additionally, some teen-
agers have to cope with more unusual stressors that could
be related to family (e.g., mental or physical illness, death
of a loved one, drug or alcohol abuse, parental separation
or divorce), social problems (e.g., poverty, violence), as well
their
individual
problems
(e.g.,
teenage
pregnancy,
serious illness, school failure, and various kinds of abuse).
Therefore, adolescence often has been thought of as a time
of storm and stress, a period of rebellion characterized by
conﬂicts with parents. Contrary to the traditional consider-
ations, however, more recent research ﬁndings support the
view that storm and stress is not a universal and exclusively
biologically based phenomenon (Susman and Rogol, 2004).
Contemporary understanding suggests that adolescence is
a period when speciﬁc types of stressors are more likely to
occur
than
other
developmental
periods
and
that
these developmental changes also include adaptation to
cultural expectations of becoming an adult. Nonetheless,
adolescents frequently have to cope with various stressors
that
could
potential
threats
their
healthy
development and well-being. For example, cumulative and
chronic
stressors
may
lead
increased
emotional
distress (e.g., depression, anxiety), antisocial behaviors (e.g.,
aggression,
delinquency),
risky
health
behaviors
(e.g.,
substance use, risky driving), and physical health outcomes
(e.g.,
physical
symptoms,
common
colds).
Traumatic
stressors, such as physical, sexual, and relational victimiza-
tion, may result in posttraumatic stress symptoms. Further-
more, many studies have found that stressful experiences
exert short-term as well as long-term effects on adolescents’
healthy development.
Mental Health Consequences of Stress
in Adolescence
Depression
Research on recent birth cohorts showed that adolescence is
one of the developmental periods during which depression
most frequently occurs (Hammen, 2009). Although estimates
of childhood depressive episodes for children under the age
of 12 years vary from 1 to 3%, several studies found
adolescence lifetime prevalence of major depression to be
from 9.3 to 24.0% (Merikangas and Knight, 2009), with an
additional 11% of adolescents reporting minor depression
(Hammen and Rudolph, 2003). Longitudinal studies have
found that depression in adolescence might have long-term
negative consequences regarding some other mental disorders
(e.g., anxiety disorders, substance use) and various negative
outcomes (e.g., academic failure, teenage pregnancy, conﬂicts
with family and peers, and suicide). Additionally, it has been
found that among those with early onset of depression, very
high percentages experience depressive episodes as adults and
that early onset of depression is related to a wide range of
psychiatric, physical, and functional health outcomes (Abela
and Hankin, 2008).
Although the majority of stressful events do not lead to
depressive episodes, most depressive episodes are preceded by
stressful events. Exposure to stressful events, such as parental
death, serious illness, and sexual and physical abuse, as well as
less traumatic events and hassles are frequently found to be risk
factors for depressive symptoms and disorders in both clinical
and community samples of children and adolescents. For
example, a review of 60 studies exploring the associations
between stressors and psychological problems, including
depressive symptoms in children and adolescence showed that
stressful experiences predict increases in mental health prob-
lems over time (Grant et al., 2004). It has been found that stress
and depression are bidirectionally inﬂuenced, that is, those
with depression histories have greater chance to experience
additional distress in the future. A better understanding of
the
reciprocal
inﬂuence
stress
and
depression
may
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, 2nd edition, Volume 23
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, Second Edition, 2015, 562–569
Author's personal copy
have important implications for the course, treatment, and
prevention of depression.
Strong evidence exists for gender differences in depressive
disorders in adolescence. Recent meta-analysis reveals a higher
prevalence of depression among teenage adolescent girls
compared with boys (Costello et al., 2006). One longitudinal
birth-cohort study found gender difference in major depres-
sive episodes, with girls having higher rates of depression
beginning from age 13 years, with this difference becoming
more pronounced by age 15 years (Hankin et al., 1998).
Therefore, it seems that the gender difference in depression
emerges between ages 12 and 15 years, and by early
adulthood women are twice as likely as men to experience
depressive
episodes.
Several
biological
and
psychosocial
factors that can explain this difference have been identiﬁed.
Besides
biological
risk
factors
(e.g.,
dysregulation
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis, genetic
factors,
and
dysregulation
neurotransmitter
systems
regulating mood), psychosocial risk factors (e.g., negative
cognitive style, interpersonal orientation, and negative life
stress)
also
proved
be important
(Hilt
and
Nolen-
Hoeksema, 2009). Namely, many studies demonstrated that
girls are exposed to greater levels of stressors, as well as that
they report more interpersonal stressors compared with boys
who report more academic stressors (Hammen, 2009). Girls
also more often than boys are the victims of physical and
sexual abuse, with both types of abuse being risk factors for
the development of depression. Additionally, girls appear to
generate more dependent stressors that contribute to their
depression, and they are more reactive to stress than boys.
Research results consistently show that under high levels of
stress, girls have greater tendency to express depressive
symptoms than boys.
Anxiety Disorders
Anxiety and depression share important features, but are
nevertheless distinguishable phenomena. Although most fears
during childhood and adolescence are considered appropriate
for the developmental periods and the situations in which they
occur, and although anxiety usually is thought of as adaptive
because it helps in anticipating threat or harm, its clinical
expression usually refers to developmentally inappropriate
fears or to those that are developmentally appropriate but that
produce excessive distress or dysfunction (Moore et al., 2010).
Anxiety disorders usually begin relatively early in life, often
manifesting before late adolescence.
Epidemiological data show that the anxiety disorders often
are evident in children and adolescents. Overall, lifetime
prevalence estimates in children and adolescents for any
anxiety disorder
range from
approximately
10 to 20%
(Costello et al., 2004). Speciﬁc types of anxiety disorders, such
as panic disorder (PD), speciﬁc phobias, social phobia,
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD), acute stress disorder, separation anxiety
disorder (SAD), and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) occur
with different frequency during the period of childhood and
adolescence. Epidemiological studies show that GAD is the
most common, followed by SAD, social phobia, and the
speciﬁc phobias. Much less frequent are PTSD, OCD, and PD,
with less than 1% prevalence in population samples. Consid-
ering gender differences, research shows that girls are affected
more, and the overall gender ratio for anxiety disorders
throughout childhood and adolescence is w2:1 (Costello et al.,
2004). Untreated anxiety disorders tend to become chronic,
with only a minority of adults (12–30%) exhibiting sponta-
neous remission. Adolescents show somewhat higher rates of
recovery, and the majority of early onset anxiety disorders remit
by early adulthood.
Early anxiety disorders, however, especially those that
develop in late adolescence, represent major risk factors for the
development of anxiety disorders in adulthood. Several disor-
ders, such as PD, social phobia, GAD, and OCD, frequently
manifest waxing and waning symptoms in which the exacer-
bation of symptoms may be related to stressful experience
(DSM-IVTR; APA, 2000).
Ample evidence indicates that the most prominent factors
that contribute to the development and maintenance of anxiety
symptoms and disorders are biological predispositions (e.g.,
family-genetic, neurobiological, and hormonal), but environ-
mental
factors
should
not
underestimated.
Namely,
although more consistent ﬁndings were obtained for depressive
disorders, many studies showed that children and adolescents
who are exposed to chronic stressors and unpredictable
circumstances may be at greater risk for developing anxiety
disorders. Research suggest that GAD may result after family
relocations, school changes, or other stressful life events (Vasey
and Ollendick, 2000), although stressful events related to
health and family discord are predictive of increases in
anxiety sensitivity (McLaughlin and Hatzenbuehler, 2009).
Parenting practices also may lead to anxiety disorders. For
example, overprotective parents usually reinforce avoidant
and inhibited behavior in their children encouraging them to
perceive many situations as new or negative, which in turn
lead to their impaired ability to cope and raises their anxiety.
Furthermore, a moderate degree of speciﬁcity exists in the
associations between types of life events and types of anxiety
disorders. For example, it has been found that parental
separation was related with GAD, while parental death was
related with increased risk for phobia (Kendler et al., 1992).
Prevailing theoretical models of the causes of internalizing
disorders (depression and anxiety) are variants of diathesis-
stress models. The fundamental assumption of a diathesis-
stress model is that both the diathesis (also interchangeably
referred to as vulnerability) and various environmental condi-
tions (e.g., stressors) are necessary for the development of
a disorder and that neither one alone is sufﬁcient. Therefore, it is
assumed that internalizing symptoms results from the interac-
tion between different vulnerabilities (e.g., neurobiological,
genetic, cognitive and environmental) and stressful events.
Suicide
According to the World Health Organization (2001), suicide
is one of the three leading causes of death among people
from 15 to 34 years of age in all countries. The results of
a meta-analysis of 128 studies from different countries
showed that 10% of youths reported a suicide attempt, and
20–30% reported suicidal ideations at some point in their
life (Evans et al., 2005). The higher rate of death by suicide is
Stress in Adolescence: Effects on Development
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, Second Edition, 2015, 562–569
Author's personal copy
observed in adolescent boys, while after puberty adolescent
girl show higher rates of suicidal ideation and suicide
attempts.
The strongest risk factors for attempted and completed
suicide in youth are previous suicide attempts, suicidal idea-
tion, and the presence of psychiatric disorders, especially
depressive disorder, alcohol and drug abuse, conduct disorder,
and aggressive-impulsive behavior (Gould et al., 2003).
Furthermore,
environmental
stressors
also
have
been
recognized as having a role in suicide attempts and suicidal
ideation. For example, several studies have found that life
events, such as interpersonal loss and legal or disciplinary
problems have been linked to completed suicide (Jacobson
and Gould, 2009). Childhood physical abuse (e.g., corporal
punishment), sexual abuse, and neglect also have been
related to suicidal behavior. The younger the person was at
the time of the ﬁrst abuse, the higher the number of suicide
attempts reported (Berk et al., 2010).
Bullying also is linked to suicidal behavior among
adolescents, especially girls, as indicated by a large epidemi-
ological study showing that bullying perpetrators and their
victims, as well as youth who are both victims and perpetra-
tors, have a higher risk for suicidal ideation and suicide
attempts (Brunstein-Klomek et al., 2007). Parental conﬂict is
found to be related more frequently to suicide in younger
adolescents, whereas romantic relationship difﬁculties are
associated more strongly with suicide in older adolescents
(Brent et al., 1999).
Neither psychiatric disorders nor stress alone, although
important, are sufﬁcient to trigger suicidal behavior. It is likely
that the combination of underlying psychiatric disorders paired
with an acute stressor typically leads to suicide.
Substance Use
Adolescence is a period of life characterized by the experi-
mentation with risky behaviors and is a critical developmental
period for the onset of substance use and, sometimes, the
beginning of the trajectory toward substance dependency.
Evidence shows that approximately 50% of adolescents have
tried an illicit drug at least once before the end of their high
school education, more than 75% have tried alcohol, and
approximately 60% of high school seniors report some
experience with cigarette smoking, with 19% of them being
daily smokers (Johnston et al., 2001, 2002). Substance use
and addictive disorders are topics of great importance because
of their pervasive negative consequences that may affect the
course of adolescent development as well as outcomes in
adulthood. For example, accidents, suicides, and homicides
account for more than 80% of adolescence deaths, of which at
least 50% include drugs and alcohol (Soderstrom and
Dearing-Stuck, 1993). Studies also suggest that long-term
consequence that is most reliably related to substance use in
adolescence is the continued use of that substance. It has been
found that adolescence substance use is associated with
psychological
distress
and
mental
health
problems
adulthood.
Research shows many risk factors for drug abuse, each
having a different impact depending on the phase of
development. These factors can be related to individual
characteristics (e.g., genetic susceptibility to addiction, high
sensation seeking and impulsivity, alienation, academic
failure, and low commitment to school), as well as environ-
mental stressful events (e.g., family problems, problems with
peers and community environment).
Studies consistently have found that adolescents who
experience high levels of life stress are more likely to use
alcohol or drugs and to increase the quantity and the
frequency of substance use over time (Chassin et al., 2004).
The most frequent explanation of the role of stress in
substance use is that adolescents who experience high level
of stress and negative affect use alcohol or drugs as a way to
decrease them. This is in accord with research ﬁndings
showing
that
emotional
distress,
negative
affect,
and
clinically
diagnosed
depression
are
associated
with
adolescent substance use, although some results show that
negative affect might be a result, rather than a cause, of
adolescent substance use.
Furthermore, although substance use often is considered
as a motivation to reduce negative affect, it also is seen as
a way to increase positive affect (Chassin et al., 2004). This
distinction in the motive for substance use is important
because it has been suggested that adolescents who use
substances to maintain or enhance positive affect may use
them moderately in quantity and frequency, whereas those
who use substances to decrease negative affect may use
them more excessively.
Antisocial Behavior
Among several types of mutually intercorrelated antisocial
behaviors the most important are conduct disorder, aggres-
sion, and delinquency. They are related logically and empir-
ically and, therefore, risk factors that apply to one of them also
likely apply to the other two (Farrington, 2004). The
prevalence estimates for antisocial behaviors in adolescence
are usually very high. For example, the prevalence of
conduct disorders in adolescent boys varies from 6 to 16%,
and in adolescent girls it ranges from 2 to 9% (Mandel, 1997).
The etiology of antisocial behaviors includes multiple risk
factors that do not occur in isolation. They can be grouped into
individual, family, and extrafamilial factors (Connor, 2002).
Genetic factors and individual differences in temperament are
the most important individual factors. Among family and
extrafamilial risk factors, chronic and acute stressful life events
are predominant. Several family factors found to be strongly
associated
with
antisocial
behaviors
are
severe
marital
discord,
overcrowding
large
family
size,
paternal
criminality, maternal psychiatric disorder and the family
history of admission of a child into the care of local child
protective services. Extrafamilial risk factors for antisocial
behaviors include relationship with peers, social deprivation,
neighborhood violence, and media violence (Connor, 2002).
Except for heritable genetic factors, the majority of risk factors
are nonspeciﬁc. Namely, they increase the risk for wide
variety of general adolescent psychopathology, including
different types of antisocial behaviors. Research also suggest
that cumulative effects of multiple risk factors exert a much
stronger inﬂuence on antisocial behavior in children and
adolescents than any speciﬁc type of risk factors.
Stress in Adolescence: Effects on Development
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, Second Edition, 2015, 562–569
Author's personal copy
Physiological and Physical Health-Related
Consequences of Adolescent Stress
When an event has been appraised as stressful, our body triggers
a sequence of physiological reactions. Physiological stress
response and its control are regulated by the two axes of the
neuroendocrine
system:
HPA
and
sympathetic-adrenal-
medullary (SAM) pathways. The activation of the SAM axis is
related strongly to acute emotions, such as fear and anger, and
describes the ﬁrst part of the stress response. During stress, the
hypothalamus helps the body to prepare for ‘ﬁght or ﬂight’ by
triggering sympathetic impulses to various organs, stimulating
the release of epinephrine, norepinephrine, and other cate-
cholamines in the blood circulation. Catecholamines can cause
changes in blood pressure, heart rate, sweating, and pupil
dilatation, which result in a feeling of arousal. They also have
an effect on a variety of body tissues and can lead to changes in
immune function. In addition to the sympathetic activation,
stress also triggers changes in the HPA system. At the same time
that sympathetic activity increases, the hypothalamus releases
corticotropin-releasing hormone, which stimulates the anterior
pituitary
gland
secrete
adrenocorticotropic
hormone
(ACTH), which increases the adrenal cortex’s secretion of
cortisol. Cortisol supplies cells with amino acids and extra
energy sources and diverts glucose from skeletal muscles to
brain tissue. Stress also stimulates the release of glucagon
from the pancreas, growth hormone from the anterior
pituitary, antidiuretic hormone from the posterior pituitary
gland, and renin from the kidneys. Through feedback to the
hypothalamus, epinephrine can increase secretions of ACTH
higher
levels
and
thus
can
maintain
the
increased
activation of HPA axis (Tsigos and Chrousos, 2002). The
neurohormonal and immune changes that develop during
stress are physiological pathways through which stress can
lead to mental and physical health outcomes.
Many factors during adolescence simultaneously contribute
to the heightened sensitivity to stressful events, especially
neurobiological processes, such as the continued maturation of
stress-responsive brain regions, the changes in hormonal reac-
tivity, and the quantity and quality of stressful events. For
example, research shows that gender differences in the func-
tioning of stress-related physiological pathways begin during
adolescence and persist into adulthood. Available evidence
suggests that HPA response in girls differs from those in boys,
generally, and is more under the inﬂuence of genetic factors
and previous environmental exposures. Studies suggest that
variants in speciﬁc genes, parental depression, and stressful
events affect cortisol responses in girls more than those in
boys. A greater reactivity to internal and external inﬂuences
under stress than may be adaptive in many situations also
might be related to risks (e.g., increased probability of
depression) (Oldehinkel and Bouma, 2011).
Most studies dealing with the impact of stress on adoles-
cent health and psychological well-being have found that
adolescents suffer from a large number of body complaints
that might be considered as psychosomatic symptoms (e.g.,
headaches, stomachaches, indigestion, circulatory problems,
and nausea). Among those most frequently reported are
abdominal pain, chest pain, and headaches (Seiffge-Krenke,
1998). There are indications that daily hassles are better
predictors of somatic symptoms than major life events.
Among stressful situations that are most important for
elevated somatic symptoms in this developmental period
are school-related stressors, such as interpersonal problems
with peers and teachers, schoolwork pressure, and fear of
school failure. Additionally, the transition from primary to
secondary school, as well as conﬂicts with parents, are
stressful experiences that in many adolescents increase the
frequency and intensity of somatic health symptoms.
Stress also leads to a signiﬁcant decrease in the function of
cellular immunity such as lower NK-cells activity, lower
lymphocyte
proliferation,
and
production
gamma
interferon (IFN-g), as well as the increases in herpes virus
antibody production. These changes are related to a greater
susceptibility
infectious
diseases,
such
herpes
reactivations, infections of the upper respiratory tract, and
HIV
infections.
Exam
stress,
stressor
typical
for
adolescents, frequently leads to these immune changes and
related infectious diseases (Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2002).
Research also shows that stressful life events have an
impact on chronic illnesses in adolescents. Especially high
incidence of stressful life events has been found in children
and adolescents with cancer, who most frequently reported
the experience of marital separation, death of a close family
member, change in residence, and change in health of family
members before the onset of cancer (Seiffge-Krenke, 1998).
Although these ﬁndings could not be considered as evidence
of causal relations between stressful events and diseases,
and
although
physiological
mechanisms
these
associations are not fully understood, it seems that not
a single event, but rather the accumulation of several major
stressors, could have negative effects on health outcomes.
Although the strongest associations between life events and
the onset of chronic illness have been found in cancer patients,
the negative impact of life events also was found in patients
with other chronic diseases. Studies on diabetic patients also
show greater frequency of stressful life events before the onset
of diabetes, and it has been found that stress could contribute
to the onset of type 1 diabetes through its effects on
the immune function (Cox and Gonder-Frederick, 1992).
Furthermore, higher levels of diabetes-speciﬁc stress as well as
general stress are associated with less adherent behavior and
subsequently more problems with metabolic control, at least
in patients with type 1 diabetes (Farrell et al., 2004).
Stress can be an important factor in the onset, clinical
course, and asthma-related mortality. For example, stressful
life events such as family dysfunction and patterns of behavior
that increase psychological conﬂict as well as stressful school
exams can accelerate the onset and recurrence of asthma after
the remission. Furthermore, studies have found that children
and adolescents from socially isolated families have more
frequent symptoms of asthma, more days of restricted activ-
ities because of the symptoms, worse illness management,
and more frequent visits made to physicians (Wright et al.,
1998). It seems that high levels of ongoing chronic stress
plus an acute negative life event could be an especially
important risk combination for an asthma attack in children
and adolescents. Research highlights immune mechanisms
through which psychosocial variables, such as stress, may
plausibly affect asthma outcomes. For example, stress has
Stress in Adolescence: Effects on Development
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, Second Edition, 2015, 562–569
Author's personal copy
been linked to inﬂamed bronchial pathways implicated in
asthma (Chen et al., 2006).
Psychosocial stress also has been related to the onset
worsening
various
dermatological
disorders.
may inﬂuence dermatological symptoms in primary stress-
reactive
skin
disorders
which
neuroendocrine
and
psychoneuroimmunologic factors have a crucial role (e.g.,
psoriasis, atopic dermatitis or eczema, urticaria, acne, and
alopecia areata), in disorders characterized by physiological
response (e.g., excessive perspiration and blushing), as well as
in skin disorders resulting from psychiatric condition such as
OCD, PTSD, or major depressive disorder (e.g., dermatitis
artefacta,
neurotic
excoriations,
trichotillomania)
(Gupta, 2010).
Stressful events frequently experienced by adolescents, such
as exams, have been found to worsen some dermatological
diseases (e.g., acne). Additionally, an increase in distress is
related with the increase in acne severity. Acne has a peak
incidence during adolescence, a period typical for intensive
preoccupation with body image and appearance. Therefore,
besides the contribution of psychosocial stress to the onset of
dermatological disease, the disease itself may result in signiﬁ-
cant stress for the patient. For example, in vulnerable adoles-
cents, even mild acne could result in severe depression.
Several neurophysiological mechanisms have been impli-
cated in stress-mediated skin disorders. Because stressful
emotional experiences disturb the regulation of the HPA
and the SAM systems, they may result in the alternations of
glucocorticoid levels. For example, studies have found
a relation between stress and an imbalance in the epidermal
permeability barrier function, which is mediated by the
increase in endogenous glucocorticoids. Additionally, higher
anxiety in acne patients have been associated with high
blood
catecholamine
levels,
which
decreased
with
the
treatment of the acne, suggesting that the anxiety in acne
patients is
associated with the
SAM system activation
(Gupta, 2010).
Effects of Cognitive Appraisal, Coping, and Social
Support on the Experience of Stress
The same stressful event in different individuals may lead to the
distress of various intensities. What is extremely stressful in one
individual may not be at all stressful in another. Among the
most important sources of variation in the effects of stress
during adolescence are personality traits, cognitive appraisal,
coping with stress, and social support. According to the trans-
actional model of stress and coping, the appraisal of a situation
determines the degree of stress experienced by the individual
(Lazarus and Folkman, 1984). The model describes two main
types of cognitive evaluations of stressful situations, primary
and secondary appraisals. Primary appraisal includes the
individual’s assessment of the stressfulness of the situation.
Situations appraised as stressful can involve harm, loss,
threat,
challenge.
Secondary
appraisal
includes
the
individual’s assessment of controllability of the stressful
episode and the choice of coping strategies. These two types
of appraisals are parallel processes that may be automatic and
usually occur without conscious awareness. Coping is most
often deﬁned as constantly changing cognitive and behavioral
efforts to manage speciﬁc external or internal demands that
are appraised as taxing or exceeding the resources of the
person (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984). According to this
theory, coping efforts are broadly classiﬁed into two types:
problem-focused
and
emotion-focused
coping.
Problem-
focused coping can be directed outward to alter some aspect
of the environment or inward to alter some aspect of the self.
They
include
cognitions
and
behaviors
directed
toward
analyzing and solving a problem and may as well include
dividing the problem, seeking information, and considering
alternative courses of actions as well as direct action. The
efforts directed toward self are various forms of reappraisals,
such as changing the meaning of the situation or event,
reducing ego involvement, or recognizing the existence of
personal resources or strengths. Emotion-focused coping
strategies are directed toward decreasing emotional distress.
They include various ways of coping usually described as
expression and suppression of emotions as well as seeking
emotional
support
from
others.
Besides
problem-
and
emotion-focused coping, avoidance coping also is included in
some taxonomies of coping with stress. It refers to cognitive
or behavioral avoidance or denial of the problem.
During puberty and adolescence, the differentiation of
coping resources, skills, and strategies oriented toward
problem solving are under the inﬂuence of cognitive devel-
opment and social experience. Adolescence is a period in
human life characterized by a relatively quick development
and the use of a broader range of coping strategies, as well as
the tendency to abandon ineffective coping. For example,
between 13 and 15 years of age, a signiﬁcant decrease of
avoidance coping has been noted. Also, it has been observed
that older adolescents use wishful thinking and distancing less
than before. Adolescence is also a critical period for the
development of some ineffective coping strategies, especially
social withdrawal and alcohol and substance use (Aldwin,
2007). Regarding gender differences, the most consistent
result found in the literature is that girls use emotion-
focused coping more often than boys. To the lesser extent,
this is also true for problem-focused coping. This usually is
explained by their faster maturation and the experience of
higher
levels
stress
during
early
adolescence
when
compared with boys. Also, it has been found that boys use
drugs, alcohol, and repressive coping more often than girls.
Among major antecedents of coping with stress are indi-
vidual differences in temperament and other personality traits
as well as in self-concept. These factors inﬂuence the
availability of coping strategies in stressful situations as well
as the appraisal of the stressfulness of events. For example,
the majority of research shows that the personality trait of
extraversion is related to active and more efﬁcacious coping
strategies,
such
problem-focused
coping,
whereas
neuroticism is related to passive and less efﬁcacious coping
strategies, such as avoidance. Neuroticism is related to
higher exposure and reactivity to stressful events and also is
considered to be a disposition for stressful experience even
in the absence of stressors. Furthermore, adolescents who
are high in self-esteem usually adopt problem-focused
coping strategies, whereas adolescents with low self-esteem
often adopt avoidant and emotion-focused coping strategies.
Stress in Adolescence: Effects on Development
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, Second Edition, 2015, 562–569
Author's personal copy
Coping strategies are not deﬁned as generally effective or
ineffective, but rather their effectiveness may depend on the
type of situation, speciﬁc combinations between different
coping strategies, and timing in their use during the course of
a stressful transaction. For example, avoidance strategies are
more effective in reducing emotional distress in the short
term, and problem-focused strategies are more effective over
the long term. When the stress is perceived as controllable,
problem-focused coping strategies are associated with fewer
psychological symptoms, whereas in uncontrollable stressful
situations,
emotion-focused
coping
related
fewer
symptoms.
Considering various health consequences of coping with
stress, numerous studies show that some coping strategies
more often are related to positive, whereas others to negative,
health outcomes. For example, longitudinal research on
adolescents reveals that the use of avoidance and emotion-
focused coping have been linked with more intensive
depressive and anxiety symptoms, whereas the use of
problem-focused coping has been associated negatively with
depression and hopelessness. Furthermore, problem-focused
coping has been found to correlate negatively with health
problems and health risk behaviors, whereas avoidance
coping correlated positively with these domains (Wilson
et al., 2005). Generally, it could be concluded that when
adolescents lack adequate coping skills, there is a risk from
various
negative
consequences,
including
psychological
distress and suicidal attempts, smoking and substance use,
and high-risk sexual behaviors (Rew, 2005).
Social support is considered to be one of the most important
psychosocial factors that inﬂuence the relationship between stress
and health outcomes. It has been deﬁned broadly as interpersonal
social resources that involve either the presence or the implication
of stable human relationships. Social support is regarded as
structural (e.g., number of social contacts, size, and density of
social networks) or functional (e.g., informative, emotional,
instrumental). Evidence suggests that social support generally
contributes to better adjustment of adolescents and that their low
satisfaction with social support is associated with anxiety, depres-
sion, psychosomatic symptoms, and interpersonal sensitivity.
The protective roles of social support on health outcome
are explained by the two models. The main-effect model states
that social support has independent effects on mental and
physical health outcomes regardless of the level of stress
experienced, while the stress-buffering model posits that
social support has indirect effects on health outcomes by
acting as a buffer against stress (Cohen and Wills, 1985).
Among adolescents, the social support of family and peers
has great signiﬁcance. Parental support has been found to be
a predictor of better adjustment and less distress in adoles-
cence. The presence of familial social support has been asso-
ciated with higher levels of resilience. On the other hand,
different studies show that two characteristics of a risky family
social environment – conﬂict and aggression and a cold,
unsupportive,
neglectful
home
have
adverse
developmental effects on adolescents. It has been shown that
parental support, involvement, and monitoring reduce the
probability that adolescents will engage in a variety of health-
compromising behaviors. Furthermore, longitudinal studies
have found that lack of support and deﬁcient nurturing
during childhood leads to higher rates of illness and physical
complaints several years later (Repetti et al., 2002).
Without the support of a peer group, adolescents experi-
ence loneliness and a sense of lack of belonging and accep-
tance, which, in turn, can contribute to frustration and
feelings of rejection and emergence of antisocial behavior.
Along with positive effects of the peer support, adolescence is
also a period during which relationships with peers can
undermine healthy development. For example, drug use and
risky sexual behavior may be inﬂuenced greatly by peers.
Regarding drug use, adolescents who become involved with
substance use usually have friends who do the same.
Social support most effectively acts as a buffer against
stress when it matches the needs elicited by a stressful event.
Even social relationships that are close and supportive are not
uniformly positive and may have negative consequences. For
example, being close to and having highly supportive anti-
social parents might result in various types of problematic
behaviors of adolescents, such as substance abuse or conduct
disorder (Rook, 2003). Also, it has been found that diabetic
adolescents who turn to their peers for coping strategies
may have worse metabolic control than those who turn to
their parents (Aldwin, 2007).
Cross-Cultural Differences in the Effects of Stress
on the Development of Adolescents
As mentioned, developmental changes during adolescence,
among other factors, also include adaptation to cultural
expectations of becoming an adult. The greatest part of our
knowledge about the effects of stress on development in
adolescence was drawn from the research on the samples from
Western societies. Theoretical assumptions as well as empirical
evidence suggest the existence of cultural differences in the
effects of stress on the adolescent development. Cultures differ
in the norms, beliefs, and values that provide prescriptions for
behavior and therefore have a different impact on the stress
process. Aldwin (2007) stated that culture can affect the stress
and coping process in four ways. It shapes the types of
stressors that a person is likely to experience, affects the
appraisal of the stressfulness of a given situation, affects the
choice of coping strategies, and provides different institutional
mechanisms
which
person
can
cope
with
stress.
Furthermore, because of the intercultural exchange that has
increased markedly over the past several decades throughout
the world, the problem of acculturative stress has become
highly pronounced. Also, it has been emphasized that stress
increases with rapid social change, most often in the form of
westernization and a change in values (e.g., individualism,
competition, and consumerism) (Dasen, 2000).
Considering ethnic differences in the stress consequences,
Dornbusch et al. (1991) have found signiﬁcant relationships
between stressful life events and symptoms of depression
among Asian and African American, Latino, and white
adolescents, but the relationship was the weakest for African
Americans. Similarly, Gerard and Buehler (2004) have
found
that
the
relationship
between
risk
factors
and
depression in adolescence was moderated by racial–ethnic
group membership and that this relationship was stronger
Stress in Adolescence: Effects on Development
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, Second Edition, 2015, 562–569
Author's personal copy
for whites compared with both blacks and Latinos. Also, rates
of completed as well as attempted suicide vary according to
ethnicity. For example, the elevated rates of suicide among
Native American youth are supposed to be associated with
low social integration that results in limited access to
various resources. On the other hand, lower rates of suicide
among African American youth have been associated with
their higher levels of religiosity compared with white youth.
Highest levels of suicidal ideation and attempts are found in
Hispanic females and can be attributed to a combination of
cultural factors, including familism, authoritarian parenting
style,
and
conﬂicts
with
caregivers
over
the
issue
individuality
(Jacobson
and
Gould,
2009).
Comparing
adolescent coping behaviors from seven different European
nations, Gelhaar et al. (2007) found the highest cultural
differences for coping with job-related problems, while
similarities were found for coping with self- and future-
related problems. Cross-cultural differences in quality and
availability of social support also should be taken into
account. Namely, despite social change, stress of adolescents
is reduced more efﬁciently in those societies that manage to
maintain a strong cultural identity and a part of their value
system, such as family solidarity.
Conclusion
Although studies on the effects of stress on development of
adolescence are numerous, more longitudinal and integrative
research is needed to broaden our understanding of how
complex relations between stress and mediating and moder-
ating processes (personality, cognitive appraisal, coping, social
support) exert their effects on (un)healthy development of
adolescents. Also, the problem of the lack of comprehensive
research exploring the factors associated with ethnicity that
inﬂuence the relationship between stress and adolescent health
is becoming more and more pronounced because the current
intercultural exchange has considerably increased worldwide.
It is well known that stressful experience can lead to long-term
changes in the body by destabilizing different physiological
pathways, which often result in various mental and physical
health outcomes. Therefore, knowledge of the deleterious
effects of stress on adolescent health outcomes may be of help
planning
and
organizing
prevention
and
treatment
programs and thus improve adolescents’ quality of life.
See also: Adolescence, Sociology of; Adolescent Health and
Health Behaviors; Adolescent Sexual Risk; Alcohol Use among
Young People; Alcohol Use and Abuse; Antisocial Behavior;
Anxiety and Anxiety Disorders; Coping across the Lifespan;
Depression, Pessimism, and Health; Depression; Suicide,
Sociology of; Suicide.
Bibliography
Abela, J.R.Z., Hankin, B.L., 2008. Depression in children and adolescents: causes,
treatment, and prevention. In: Abela, J.R.Z., Hankin, B.L. (Eds.), Handbook of
Depression in Children and Adolescents, ﬁrst ed. The Guilford Press, New York,
pp. 3–5.
Aldwin, C., 2007. Stress, Coping, and Development: An Integrative Perspective,
second ed. The Guilford Press, New York.
American Psychiatric Association, 2000. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, fourth ed. American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC.
Berk, M., Suddath, R., Devich-Navarro, M., 2010. Adolescent suicide. In: Fink, G.
(Ed.), Stress Consequences: Mental, Neuropsychological and Socioeconomic,
ﬁrst ed. Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 316–317.
Brent, D.A., Baugher, M., Bridge, J., Chen, T., Chiappetta, L., 1999. Age- and sex-
related risk factors for adolescent suicide. Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 38, 1497–1505.
Brunstein-Klomek, A., Marrocco, F., Kleinman, M., Schonfeld, I., Gould, M., 2007.
Bullying, depression, and suicidal ideation in adolescents. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 46, 40–49.
Chassin, L., Hussong, A., Barrera Jr., M., Molina, B.S.G., Trim, R., Ritter, J., 2004.
Adolescent substance use. In: Lerner, R.M., Steinberg, L. (Eds.), Handbook of
Adolescent Psychology, second ed. John Wiley and Sons, New Jersey,
pp. 665–696.
Chen, E., Hanson, M.D., Patterson, L.Q., Grifﬁn, M.J., Walker, H.A., Miller, G.E.,
2006. Socioeconomic status and inﬂammatory processes in childhood asthma:
the role of psychological stress. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 117,
1014–1020.
Cohen, S., Wills, T.A., 1985. Stress, social support, and the buffering hypothesis.
Psychologica Bulletin 98, 310–357.
Connor, D.F., 2002. Aggression and Antisocial Behavior in Children and Adoles-
cents. The Guilford Press, New York.
Costello, E.J., Egger, H.L., Angold, A., 2004. Developmental epidemiology of anxiety
disorders. In: Ollendick, T.H., March, J.S. (Eds.), Phobic and Anxiety Disorders in
Children and Adolescents: A Clinician’s Guide to Effective Psychosocial and
Pharmacological Interventions, ﬁrst ed. Oxford University Press, New York,
pp. 61–91.
Costello, E.J., Erkanli, A., Angold, A., 2006. Is there an epidemic of child or
adolescent depression? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Applied
Disciplines 47, 1263–1271.
Cox, D.J., Gonder-Frederick, L., 1992. Major developments in behavioral diabetes
research. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 60, 628–638.
Dasen, P.R., 2000. Rapid social change and the turmoil of adolescence: a cross-
cultural perspective. International Journal of Group Tensions 29, 17–49.
Dornbusch, S.M., Mont-Reynaud, R., Ritter, P.L., Chen, Z., Steinberg, L., 1991.
Stressful events and their correlates among adolescents of diverse backgrounds.
In: Colton, M.E., Gore, S. (Eds.), Adolescent Stress: Causes and Consequences,
ﬁrst ed. Aldine de Gruyter, Hawthorne, NY, pp. 111–130.
Evans, E., Hawton, K., Rodham, K., 2005. Suicidal phenomena and abuse in
adolescents: a review of epidemiological studies. Child Abuse and Neglect 29,
45–58.
Farrell, S.P., Hains, A.A., Davies, W.H., Smith, P., Parton, E., 2004. The impact of
cognitive distortions, stress, and adherence on metabolic control in youths with
type 1 diabetes. Journal of Adolescent Health 34, 461–467.
Farrington, D.P., 2004. Conduct disorders, aggression, and delinquency. In:
Lerner, R.M., Steinberg, L. (Eds.), Handbook of Adolescent Psychology, second
ed. John Wiley and Sons, NJ, pp. 627–664.
Gelhaar, T., Seiffge-Krenke, I., Borge, A., Cicognani, E., Cunha, M., Loncaric, D.,
Macek, P., Steinhausen, H.-C., Winkler Metzke, C., 2007. Adolescent coping
with everyday stressors: a seven-nation study of youth from central, eastern,
southern,
and
northern
Europe.
European
Journal
Developmental
Psychology 4 (2), 129–156.
Gerard, J.M., Buehler, C., 2004. Cumulative environmental risk and youth malad-
justment: the role of youth attributes. Child Development 75 (6), 1832–1849.
Gould, M., Greenberg, T., Velting, D.M., Shaffer, D., 2003. Youth suicide risk and
preventive interventions: a review of the past 10 years. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 42, 386–405.
Grant, K.E., Compas, B.E., Thurm, A.E., McMahon, S.D., Gipson, P.Y., 2004.
Stressors and child and adolescent psychopathology: measurement issues and
prospective effects. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology 33,
412–425.
Gupta, M.A., 2010. Dermatological conditions. In: Fink, G. (Ed.), Stress Conse-
quences: Mental, Neuropsychological and Socioeconomic, ﬁrst ed. Elsevier,
Oxford, pp. 420–424.
Hammen, C., 2009. Stress exposure and stress generation in adolescent depres-
sion. In: Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Hilt, L.M. (Eds.), Handbook of Adolescent
Depression, ﬁrst ed. Routledge, New York, pp. 305–333.
Hammen, C., Rudolph, K.D., 2003. Childhood mood disorders. In: Mash, E.J.,
Barkley, R.A. (Eds.), Child Psychopathology, second ed. Guilford Press, New
York, pp. 233–278.
Stress in Adolescence: Effects on Development
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, Second Edition, 2015, 562–569
Author's personal copy
Hankin, B.L., Abramson, L.Y., Mofﬁtt, T.E., McGee, R., Silva, P., Angell, K.E., 1998.
Development of depression from preadolescence to young adulthood: emerging
gender differences in a 10-year longitudinal study. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology 107, 128–140.
Hilt, L.M., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., 2009. The emergence of gender differences in
depression in adolescence. In: Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Hilt, L.M. (Eds.), Handbook
of Depression in Adolescents, ﬁrst ed. Routledge, New York, pp. 111–135.
Jacobson, C.M., Gould, M., 2009. Suicide and nonsuicidal self-injurious behaviors
among youth: risk and protective factors. In: Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Hilt, L.M.
(Eds.), Handbook of Depression in Adolescents, ﬁrst ed. Routledge, New York,
pp. 207–235.
Johnston, L.D., O’Malley, P.M., Bachman, J.G., 2001. Monitoring the Future
National Survey Results on Drug Use, 1975–2000. In: Secondary School
Students (NIH Publication No. 02-5106), vol. I. United States Department
Health
and
Human
Services,
National
Institute
Drug
Abuse,
Bethesda, MD.
Johnston, L.D., O’Malley, P.M., Bachman, J.G., 2002. Monitoring the Future
National Survey Results on Drug Use, 1975–2001. In: College Students and
Adults Ages 19–40, vol. II. United States Department of Health and Human
Services, National Institute on Drug Abuse, Bethesda, MD (NIH Publication No.
02–5107).
Kendler, K.S., Neale, M.C., Kessler, R.C., Heath, A.C., Eaves, L.J., 1992. Childhood
parental loss and adult psychopathology in women: a twin study perspective.
Archives of General Psychiatry 49 (2), 109–116.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J.K., McGuire, L., Robles, T.F., Glaser, R., 2002. Psychoneur-
oimmunology: psychological inﬂuences on immune function and health. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 70, 537–547.
Lazarus, R.S., Folkman, S., 1984. Stress, Appraisal, and Coping. Springer,
New York.
Mandel, H.P., 1997. Conduct Disorder and Underachievement: Risk Factors,
Assessment, Treatment, and Prevention. Wiley, New York.
McLaughlin, K.A., Hatzenbuehler, M.L., 2009. Stressful life events, anxiety sensi-
tivity, and internalizing symptoms in adolescents. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology 118 (3), 659–669.
Merikangas, K.R., Knight, E., 2009. The epidemiology of depression in adolescents.
In: Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Hilt, L.M. (Eds.), Handbook of Depression in Adoles-
cents, ﬁrst ed. Routledge, New York, pp. 53–74.
Moore, P.S., March, J.S., Albano, A.M., Thienemann, M., 2010. Anxiety disorders in
children and adolescents. In: Stein, D.J., Hollander, E., Rothbaum, B.O. (Eds.),
Textbook of Anxiety Disorders, second ed. American Psychiatric Press, Wash-
ington, DC, pp. 629–651.
Oldehinkel, A.J., Bouma, E.M.C., 2011. Sensitivity to the depressogenic effect of
stress and HPA-axis reactivity in adolescence: a review of gender differences.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 35 (8), 1757–1770.
Repetti, R.L., Taylor, S.E., Seeman, T.E., 2002. Risky families: family social envi-
ronments and the mental and physical health of offspring. Psychological Bulletin
128 (2), 330–366.
Rew, L., 2005. Adolescent Health: A Multidisciplinary Approach to Theory,
Research, and Intervention. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Rook, K.S., 2003. Exposure and reactivity to negative social exchanges: a prelimi-
nary investigation using daily diary data. Journals of Gerontology: Series B:
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences 58, 100–111.
Seiffge-Krenke, I., 1998. Adolescents’ Health: A Developmental Perspective. Law-
rence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
Soderstrom, C.A., Dearing-Stuck, B.A., 1993. Substance misuse and trauma:
clinical issues and injury prevention. Adolescent Medicine 4, 423–438.
Susman, E., Rogol, A., 2004. Puberty and psychological development. In:
Lerner, R.M., Steinberg, L. (Eds.), Handbook of Adolescent Psychology, second
ed. John Wiley and Sons, NJ, pp. 15–44.
Tsigos, C., Chrousos, G.P., 2002. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, neuroendo-
crine factors and stress. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 53 (4), 865–871.
Vasey, M.W., Ollendick, T.H., 2000. Anxiety. In: Sameroff, A.J., Lewis, M.,
Miller, S.M. (Eds.), Handbook of Developmental Psychopathology, second ed.
Plenum, New York, pp. 511–529.
Wilson, G.S., Pritchard, M.E., Revalee, B., 2005. Individual differences in adolescent
health symptoms: the effects of gender and coping. Journal of Adolescence 28
(3), 369–379.
World Health Organization, 2001. The World Health Report 2001. WHO, Geneva.
Wright, R.J., Rodriguez, M., Cohen, S., 1998. Review of psychosocial stress and
asthma:
integrated
biopsychosocial
approach.
Thorax
(12),
1066–1074.
Stress in Adolescence: Effects on Development
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, Second Edition, 2015, 562–569
Author's personal copy