The Sleep Needs of Adolescents
By Betty B. Kelman, RN, MN
Introduction
he amount of sleep is known to affect
the way adolescents perform, feel, think,
and learn during the day. The influence
of sleep on an adolescent's behavior is a fre-
quently ignored aspect of child development
(Wolfson, 1996). There is a general lack of
knowledge of developmental trends in sleep
during adolescence, gender differences in
adolescent sleep paccerns, and quality and
quantity of sleep required for optimum
physical and mental health (Yarcheski &
Mahon, 1994). Most people think adoles-
cents need less sleep than elementary school
children. The fact is, adolescents need more
sleep. Significant changes during adolescence
affect sleep and waking patterns. These
changes arise from a variety of sources, such
as academic and social pressures, an increase
in extracurricular activities, changes in par-
enc-child relationships, part-time employ-
ment, and alcohol and drug use. Sleep needs
of adolescents are also affected by the biolog-
ical onset of puberty, with che resulting phys-
ical and hormonal changes. A lack of sleep
during adolescence increases the possibility
of increased daytime sleepiness, which may
result in serious accidents (Carskadon, 1989-
1990; 1990).
While working with adolescents as a sub-
stitute school nurse, students would fre-
quently come to me with che following
request: "Can I lie down and rest for 10
minutes? I'm so tired, I can't stay awake."
Such complaints of excessive sleepiness led
the author to ask several questions. How
much sleep do adolescents need? Why do
they not get enough sleep? What can nurses
working with adolescents do to increase ado-
lescents' sleep need awareness and increase
their sleep time?
The amount of sleep affects the way adolescents perform, feel, think, learn, and
remember. Significant physiological and social changes have profound effects on
adolescents' sleeping patterns. Lack of sleep increases the possibility of increased
daytime sleepiness, which may result in a tragic automobile or work accident.
Other consequences of sleep deprivation include poor school performance,
heightened risk of drug and alcohol use, increased irritability, and aggressive
behavior, all of which can interfere with relationships with classmates, parents,
and teachers. The purpose of this paper is to explore the literature concerning
what is known about why adolescents need more sleep and why adolescents do
not obtain enough sleep. Nursing interventions targeting adolescents, parents,
teachers, schools, and employers are included If adolescents understand and
learn to improve their sleep patterns while they are young, they may have
improved sleep habits in adulthood. Teaching adolescents about the importance
of sleep is an important task for school nurses.
14 I Volume 15, Number 3
Significance of the Problem
Sleep is very important for maximum ado-
lescent achievement; therefore, lack of sleep
has significant consiquences. Frequently,
adolescents do not get enough sleep because
of their busy lives. Adolescents perform best
with 7-9 hours of sleep. A study by Mahon
(1995) notes that when the amount of sleep
decreases, adolescents report feeling less
healthy. Adolescents and their parents need
to be aware of the importance of obtaining
adequate sleep and the potential conse-
quences of sleep deprivation.
Some of the potential consequences of
insufficient sleep include increased daytime
sleepiness, which may result in falling asleep
in class, while working, or when driving.
Sleepy adolescents may encounter more aca-
demic and learning difficulties. Wolfson and
Carskadon (1998) report more hours of
sleep, earlier bedtimes, and later week-day
rise times are associated with better grades.
Carskadon ( 1989-1990) notes the most
active, highest achieving, and hardest work-
ing adolescents may be at greatest risk of
falling asleep when driving, while working
with dangerous equipment, or working in a
hazardous environment. Although motor
vehicle accidents are the greatest cause of
occupational in juries in the 15- to 19-year-
old age group, there are ocher hazardous
conditions chat adolescents encounter
(Brezler, 1999). Examples of dangerous or
hazardous jobs that adolescents hold include
janitorial or clean-up jobs which may
expose them to toxic chemicals in cleaning
products, blood on discarded needles, and
slippery floors. In addition, adolescent food
service workers are exposed to hot cooking
equipment and sharp objects. Retail sales
clerks are at risk from violent crimes and
heavy lifting (NIOSH, 1997).
Another important and dangerous conse-
quence of not geccing enough sleep is the
combined effect of alcohol and sleep depri-
vation. Although adolescent drinking is ille-
Journal of School Nursing August 1999
gal, some adolescents do consume alcohol.
A non-sleep-deprived adolescent may not
suffer harm from one or two beers in the
afternoon or evening. However, an adoles-
cent who is sleep deprived may not be able
to tolerate this combination without feeling
excessively sleepy (Carskadon, 1989-1990).
More importantly, this combination can be
a safety hazard for the adolescent when dri-
ving or working.
Other consequences of sleep deprivation
in adolescents include poor school perfor-
mance, greater risk of drug abuse to counter-
act sleepiness with caffeine or other strong
stimulants, and increased irritability, which
can interfere with relationships with adults
and classmates (Carskadon, 1990). Insuffi-
cient sleep is associated with aggressive
behavior and the possibility of increased
school violence (Wolfson, 1996). Aggressive
behaviors can interfere with peer, teacher,
and parent relationships. If sleep time is
increased, adolescence may be less stressful
for parents and teachers, as well as the ado-
lescent. The purpose of this article is to
describe what is known about why adoles-
cents need more sleep and why they do not
obtain enough sleep.
Literature Review
For this review, there are two concepts
that need to be defined: adolescence and
sleep. Adolescence is the period of physical
and psychological developmental changes
that take place between childhood and
adulthood. Adolescence is divided into three
age groups: early adolescence, which is ages
12 to 14; middle adolescence, which is ages
15 to 17 years; and late adolescence, which
includes ages 18 to 21 (Mahon, 1995;
Yarcheski & Mahon;1994). Sleep is defined
as a "period of physiological loss of con-
sciousness with reduced cerebral function
and almost absent voluntary physical activ-
ity" (Thomas, 1977, p. S-56). Anch, Brow-
man, Mitler, and Walsh (1988) define sleep
as a "recurring state of existence character-
ized by the following occurrences: (a) reduc-
tions in awareness of and interaction with
the environment; (b) lowered motility and
muscular activity; and (c) partial or complete
abeyance of voluntary behavior and con-
sciousness" (p. 2).
Mahon (1995) summarizes four theories
of why humans need to sleep. The restora-
tive theory implies that sleep promotes
physiologic responses that rejuvenate the
I Journal of School Nursing August 1999
FREE service of your
Braun ThermoScan®
thermometer ...
Only from MBM Health!
Free calibration check with all service
charges waived, if necessary.
Send your Braun ThermoScan professional thermometer
to the address below and it will be thoroughly checked
for calibration. If your unit does require service,
Braun ThermoScan will waive the $75.00 service charge.
Added back-to-school bonus:
buy one Braun ThermoScan
thermometer, get one free!
For a limited time only, when you purchase any
Braun ThermoScan long-lasting and accurate
thermometer, you get one free. Offer expires
August 31, 1999 - order yours today!
So, reach new heights this new school year!
MBM Health and Braun ThermoScan are taking
your level of health care to the head of the class!
FOR YOUR BRAtJN TuEaMoScAN · •.
PROFESSIONAL TiiERMOMETER CAUllRATION CHECK
V.ll BRAUN'S CUSTOMER SERVICE DEPT. AT (8.Q(l)~~r,7,2i~~~A ~
AUlliORIZATJON NUMBER. You MUST REFERENat~c6DE:itffiiM99 AND;pii
$75 REPAIR fEE, A5 WELL AS CHARGES fOR SHIPPING.YOUR UJ'llT IIACK 1:0 YOV;
Will BE WAIVE!), (YOU PAY FOIi. S!ilPPING T0 BRAUN 'ft-t~oScANJ
SEND YOUR Tlitl!MOMflEll TO:·
BRAUN THERMOSCAN TECHNICAL ~
10421 PACIFIC CENTER Coun, 5ANDn'.Go,P\,,9'212l
For further inf ormatlon, please call the regional office nearest you.
Northeast
West Coast
Southeast
Midwest
Southwest
(800) 431-2743 (800) 241-6555 (800) 345-9883 (800) 713-8388 (800) 730-2666
MBM Health
DIVISION OF MICRO BIO-MEDICS, INC.
Visit MBM Health's Web site at www.microbiomedics.com
Volume 15, Number 3 j 15
THE SLEEP NEEDS OF ADOLESCENTS
mind and body. The energy conservation
theory suggests that sleep conserves energy
through a period of enforced rest and
immobility. Another theory, known as
adaptive theory, implies that sleep is a
behavior that enhances survival. It also
implies that sleep is an instinct occurring in
response to stimuli, promoting survival of
the species. The last theory is the memory
consolidation theory, in which the function
of sleep is to promote storage of previously
learned information.
Sleep literature describes two additional
concepts -
sleep quantity and sleep quality.
Sleep quantity is the amount of sleep
obtained in a 24-hour period. Sleep quality
includes three elements: sleep disturbances,
sleep effectiveness, and sleep supplementa-
tion. Sleep disturbances include increased
amount of time it takes to fall asleep (sleep
latency), waking up in the middle of sleep-
ing, excessive movement during sleep, and
lack of soundness of sleep. If someone has
problems falling asleep at night, wakes up
many times at night, moves their legs and
arms enough to awake, or sleeps "too shal-
lowly," any one or all of the above sleep
problems are considered sleep disturbances.
Sleep effectiveness is the subjective quality
of sleep. It is assessed upon wakening and is
usually reported as how well an individual
slept. Sleep supplementation is daytime
sleeping or napping (Carskadon, 1989-
1990; Mahon, 1995; Yarcheski & Mahon,
1994). Sleep supplementation is prevalent in
adolescents (Mahon, 1995). The many
social demands of adolescents decrease the
total quantity of hours available to sleep.
The quality of sleep changes in adolescence,
and sleep disturbances are common in all
adolescent age ranges.
Sleep is divided into two stages called
NREM (non-rapid eye movement) and
REM (rapid eye movement). NREM is
divided into four stages, stages one to four
from light to deep sleep. In NREM stage
one sleep, the individual transitions from
wakefulness to sleep in about five minutes.
The person is drowsy, relaxed, somewhat
aware of the surroundings, has quickly pass-
ing thoughts, and can easily be awakened
(Murray & Zentner, 1997). Eye movements
are slow, rolling, and swaying in this stage
(Wolfson, 1996). Stage rwo NREM sleep is
the beginning of a deeper sleep and fills
40-50% of total sleep time. The individual
is more relaxed than in stage one, but can be
awakened easily (Murray & Zentner, 1997).
16 I Volume 15, Number 3
According to Wolfson (1996), stage rwo is
the most frequently occurring sleep stage and
is characterized by the absence of eye move-
ments. NREM stage three sleep is a period of
progressively deeper sleep and starts 30 to 45
minutes after sleep onset. Muscles are more
relaxed, metabolic activity is lower, and the
individual is difficult to awaken. Stage four
NREM sleep is a very deep sleep and occurs
approximately 40 minutes after stage one.
This stage rests and restores the body and is
as important as REM sleep. The individual is
very relaxed and seldom moves, is difficult to
arouse, and if awakened responds slowly
(Murray & Zentner, 1997).
REM sleep is called active or paradoxic
sleep. REM occurs before the deeper sleep
stages of rwo, three, and four and is charac-
terized by rapid eye movements, intense
brain activity, irregular respiration and heart
rate, and dreaming. REM sleep occurs in 70-
to 90-minute cycles that increase in length
through the night. REM sleep rests and
restores the brain and is important for learn-
ing and psychological functioning. During
REM sleep, the brain reviews the day's
events, categorizes and integrates informa-
tion into memory, and solves problems
(Murray & Zentner, 1997). When adoles-
cents shorten sleep time, there is insufficient
time spent in all stages of sleep, and they are
deprived of the rest and restorative benefits
of sleep.
Wolfson (1996) explains the changes in
sleep/wake patterns of adolescents. By early
adolescence, electrophysiological sleep para-
meters are approximately the same as those
of young adults. In addition, the ratio
berween stage four and stage three NREM
sleep decreases, and the ratio berween stage
one and stage two NREM sleep increases.
This means adolescents spend less sleep time
in the deep sleep of stage four, and there is
an increase of time in stage one. Adolescents
spend more time in the lighter stages of sleep
than they do in the restorative stages of deep
sleep. There is a slight decrease in the
amount of REM sleep, and adolescents have
a reduced REM latency.
Why Do Adolescents Need More Sleep?
Adolescents experience profound changes
in physical growth, hormonal changes, social
development, and intellectual development,
resulting in an increased need for sleep. In
addition, alterations in sleep and waking pat-
terns occur during puberty. The quality and
quantity of sleep are influenced by many fac-
tors, such as physiological changes, changes
in academic demands, earlier school starting
times, peer pressure, increased access to
drugs and alcohol, part-time employment,
changes in parent-child relationships, and
extracurricular activities (Carskadon, 1990;
Wolfson, 1996).
Wolfson (1996) reports that adolescents
obtain less sleep than elementary school chil-
dren. Elementary children sleep approxi-
mately 10 hours, and adolescents sleep less
than 7 hours. Studies show that adolescents
enjoy staying up late (Wolfson, 1996).
Although adolescents stay up late, they want
to sleep longer and complain of being tired
in the morning (Strauch & Meier, 1988).
Another survey found 45% of tenth to
rwelfth graders go to bed after midnight on
school nights, and 90% later than midnight
on weekends (Wolfson, 1996). Other studies
report weekend sleep averages 60 minutes
more than on school nights in 10-year-olds;
this time increases to 90 minutes in 13-year-
olds and increases ro approximately three
hours by age 18 (Carskadon, 1990; Strauch
& Meier, 1988; Wolfson, 1996). This may
be interpreted as adolescents not getting
enough sleep on school nights, and then
needing to make up for essential sleep on the
weekend. This need to obtain more sleep on
the weekend is considered a "sleep debt"
(Wolfson, 1996). Lack of sleep in adoles-
cents also correlates to factors such as the
onset of puberty, circadian rhythm changes,
parental influences, curfew changes, school
schedules, increased academic demands,
employment, and extracurricular activities.
Why Adolescents Do Not Obtain Enough Sleep?
Puberty. Carskadon (1990) explains that
daytime sleepiness peaks at middle adoles-
cence and remains at a higher level through
the remaining years of adolescence. Middle
and late adolescents become sleepy in the
daytime, even when sleeping as much as
early adolescents. She concludes that middle
and late adolescents may require more sleep
to be alert than early adolescents.
Circadian rhythms. Biological rhythms are
in repetitive and rhythmic patterns, and are
found in plants, animals, and humans. The
rhythms are found in the external and inter-
nal environment and can be exogenous or
endogenous. Exogenous rhythms depend on
the rhythms of the external environment,
such as seasonal variations, moon phases,
and the day and night cycle. These events
help synchronize internal rhythms with
Journal of School Nursing August 1999
the external environment. Endogenous
rhythms, such as the sleep-awake and
sleep-dream cycles, arise from within the
individual. Circadian rhythms are a form of
endogenous rhythm that reoccurs in a cyclic
pattern ranging from 20 to 28 hours. Body
temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respira-
tions, urine production, and hormones
(growth hormone is highest during night~
time sleeping), blood sugar, hemoglobin,
and amino acid levels demonstrate a rhyth-
mic pattern. Similar variations or rhythms
can be demonstrated in levels of alertness,
fatigue, tenseness, and irritability (Murray
& Zentner, 1997).
Hauri (1991) further defines circadian
rhythms and describes how circadian
rhythms influence adolescent sleep. The
rhythms of the human body are on a 24-
hour dock that regulates sleeping and wak-
ing patterns. From about 6 months to 14
years, the circadian rhythms are approxi-
mately 24 hours in length. Most pre-adoles-
cents and early adolescents are able to fall
asleep and wake up at about the same time
each day. During middle and late adoles-
cence, circadian rhythms slow from the nor-
ma! 24-hour day to a 26- to 30-hour "day."
This may explain why some adolescents do
not want to go to sleep when it is 11 p.m.,
for their body clock says it is 8 p.m. This is
also true of waking up, resulting in difficulty
getting up in the morning. When people are
in their late 20s or early 30s, the circadian
rhythms return to the 24-hour cycle (Hauri,
1991). When adolescents stay up later at
night, this delays the onset of sleep. This
change of sleep onset is due to psychosocial
factors and biological changes occurring dur-
ing puberty (Wolfson & Carskadon, 1998).
When adolescents go to sleep later and sleep
a great deal on the weekends, this further
disrupts their circadian rhythms, delaying
and lengthening their sleep time.
Parental influences. Another factor that
influences the sleep schedules of adolescents
is the way parents control their children's
bedtime. The average bedtime for 10-year-
olds is 9 to 9:30 p.m. For 13-year-olds, the
average bedtime is 10 to 10:30 p.m. For 17-
year-olds, the usual bedtime is 11 to mid-
night, and for college freshman, the average
bedtime is 1 to 2 a.m. (Carskadon, 1990).
Carskadon (1990) surveyed children and
The One
&Only
Ear.rcan®!
DSP Pure Tone A.udlom
• Smallest - palm size
• Lightest - 1 O oz.
• Full frequency audiometer
• Battery powered
• Case & batteries Included
! Journal of School Nursing August 1999
parents on the topic of parent-controlled
bedtimes. For over half of the surveyed 10-
year-olds, parents decided the bedtimes on
school nights. Only 19% of 13-year-olds'
parents decided bedtimes on school nights.
This reveals a change in parental influence as
the child reaches adolescence. Do parents
feel a 13-year-old is able to determine his or
her own sleep needs; do parents mistakenly
feel their children need less sleep during ado-
lescence; or have they lost control of this
aspect of their adolescent's life?
Cu,fews. Carskadon (1990) examined the
issue of bedtime curfews. This study evalu-
ated middle adolescent students attending
boarding school with and without deter-
mined curfews. The findings revealed stu-
dents given a bedtime curfew reported going
to bed about an hour earlier than students
who did not have a curfew. All the students
in this study slept the same amount of time.
The students with bedtime curfews woke up
about an hour earlier than those without a
curfew and reported fewer symptoms of
excessive sleepiness. The author concluded
that external influences, such as bedtime cur-
fews, have a significant influence on adoles-
Earscan®
Impedance & Audiometry
• 1 & 3 sec. tymps
• Repeatable, reliable
• Automatic audiometry
• Portable, easy to use
• Upgradeable
Volumc15, Number 3 ! 17
THE SLEEP NEEDS OF ADOLESCENTS
cent sleep patterns. Parents need to under-
stand that adolescent sleep would improve if
they set specific bedtime curfews.
School schedules and increased academic
demands. The time that school begins in the
morning is influential on setting sleep pat-
terns and the amount of sleep adolescents
receive. In many school districts, junior high
and high school students start school at an
earlier time than elementary school students.
This requires the older students to get up
earlier to take a district school bus. The com-
bination of late night activities, homework,
employment, and early morning school
attendance limits the hours available for
sleep. Adolescents who are "evening types,"
those that stay up later and wake up later in
the morning, have more difficulty adjusting
to earlier school starting times. A study done
by Carskadon, Wolfson, Tzischinsky, and
Acebo (1995) on early school schedules con-
cluded that students transitioning from
ninth grade to tenth grade and the 65-
minute earlier starting time on school days
for tenth graders, resulted in excessive day-
time sleepiness. The study reported that ado-
lescent subjects fell asleep rapidly, which may
indicate daytime sleepiness severe enough to
interfere with school performance and other
activities, such as driving.
Another study on school starting times
reported that earlier risers compared to later
risers in the study complained more about
daytime fatigue and sleepiness, and attention
and concentration difficulties in school
(Epstein, Chillag, & Lavie, 1998). The stu-
dents' complaints were independent of the
reported hours of sleep. The authors con-
cluded that early school starting time reduces
total sleep time and has a negative effect on
daytime behavior.
Junior high and high school students have
more homework, complex projects, and
more difficult subjects than they did in ele-
mentary school. For highly motivated and
gifted high school students, the desire to
excel and the excessive competition to be
accepted into a prestigious college result in
staying up late to complete homework and
study for tests. Students who want to attend
college and work part-time experience more
sleep deprivation, since they may sacrifice
sleep time to complete their assigned home-
work or study for examinations.
Part-time employment and extracurricular
activities. Part-time jobs have a significant,
deleterious influence on the sleep patterns of
adolescents. The combined hours of school,
18 I Volume 15, Number 3
homework, and part-time employment may
increase the high school student's hours to
more than 50 hours per week. According to
Carskadon (1989-1990), sleep patterns of
students working 20 hours or more per week
differ from those who do not work, or work
fewer hours. Working students stay up later
and sleep less on school nights. The students
who worked extended hours reported more
daytime sleepiness, falling asleep in class, fre-
quent tardiness due to oversleeping, and
greater use of caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco.
In addition, high school students who took
part in extracurricular activities and worked
20 hours or more per week reported a
chronic pattern of extremely shortened sleep
times. These students had symptoms of day-
time sleepiness and increased use of stimu-
lants and alcohol. This study also found that
students who worked long hours reported
being sleepy while driving. Ten percent of
high school males who worked 20 hours or
more a week in addition to 20 hours per
week in extracurricular activities admitted to
having fallen asleep "at the wheel."
Implications for School Nurses
There are many and complex reasons why
adolescents need more sleep, and why they
do not obtain sufficient sleep. Nurses work-
ing with adolescents can be effective coun-
selors to investigate reasons why they do not
sleep. They are in an influential position to
design successful school educational pro-
grams revolving around adolescent sleep
needs. When adolescents come into the
school nurse's office tired and wanting to
sleep, explore possible reasons for this tired-
ness and suggest solutions for change before
letting them take a short nap. An important
role for the school nurse is to promote
health through targeting groups of sleepy
students who would benefit from nurse-
facilitated group discussions and brain-
storming about how to lessen their demands
and increase sleep time. It is imperative to
target working students, and those with
many extracurricular activities, for sleep
interventions.
School nurses may assess sleep quantity
and quality by initiating an informal sleep
questionnaire or diary that includes how
long the adolescent slept each night and
how he or she felt the following day. This is
completed by the student for 5 to 10 days
and returned to the nurse. With this infor-
mation, the nurse is able to determine the
necessity for individual counseling or for a
school-wide educational program.
School nurses are in an excellent position
to educate adolescents on the importance of
obtaining adequate sleep. Parts of a success-
ful school educational program addressing
adolescent sleep needs include clarification
of what sleep is, how much sleep adolescents
need (strive for 8 hours), why adolescents
need to sleep, and how the physical and
social changes they are experiencing may
interfere with getting adequate sleep. The
program lessons include information on the
importance of good life-long sleep habits,
developing a night!ybedtime routine, and
getting to bed at the same time each night,
including weekends. Class lessons include
information on relaxation techniques before
going to sleep, such as listening to mellow
music, taking a warm bath, and drinking
warm milk, which contains 1-tryptophan, a
chemical that increases brain serotonin and
induces sleep (Murray & Zentner, 1997).
Additional information includes things ado-
lescents should avoid before going to bed,
such as caffeine or foods that contain caf-
feine, stimulant drugs, smoking, exercising,
or watching violent television programs.
Other lessons should emphasize the relation-
ship between getting enough sleep and feel-
ing well, and the potentially serious
consequences of not getting enough sleep,
such as falling asleep while driving. Adoles-
cents need to understand that excessive
moodiness, depression, irritability, fatigue,
tiredness, aggressiveness and violence could
be due to a sleep deficit. Measurable goals of
a successful sleep education program include
increased knowledge of how lack of sleep
affects all aspects of an adolescent's life and
expanded understanding and awareness of
how to obtain more sleep. Attitude and
behavior change are also essential outcomes
of any educational program.
In addition to working with students, an
important role for the school nurse is advis-
ing, educating, and supporting parents about
adolescent sleep requirements and suggesting
ways to empower them to direct their ado-
lescents' bedtimes and curfews so they
obtain more sleep. School nurses need to
inform business owners and work supervi-
sors of the potential sleep deficits of their
adolescent employees and recommend
changing job activities that place adolescents
at risk for injuries. School nurses need to be
knowledgeable about the U.S. Department
of Labor laws covering prohibited jobs and
,~~~r~al ()f School N11rsi11g Augus~ ~~i]
hour limitations pertaining to adolescents.
This information is found on the Internet at
www.dol.gov/dol/opa/publidsummer/guide/
flsa.htm
In conclusion, school nurses are well posi-
tioned to advocate for later school starting
times for junior and senior high students.
This can be facilitated by informing school
boards and administrators, members of the-
state legislature, parents, teachers, and other
nurses about the reasons that adolescents
need to sleep longer, why they do not obtain
adequate sleep, and the potentially cata-
strophic results if adolescents do not get suf-
ficient sleep.
Conclusions and Need for Further
Research
The literature revealed answers to the fol-
lowing questions: how much sleep adoles-
cents require, why adolescents need more
sleep, and why they do not obtain enough
sleep. Adolescents go through physical, emo-
tional, and social changes that affect the
amount of sleep they receive. With the infor-
mation in this article, school nurses can
design and coordinate creative educational
programs addressing ways to improve adoles-
cent sleep. The impact of adolescents not
sleeping long enough has the potential to
affect all of us.
Finally, nurses need to do sleep research
with adolescents to identify threats to the
safety of adolescents who experience sleep
problems and identify how schools, parents,
and employers can help adolescents obtain
sufficient sleep. Nurses should observe pat-
terns of office visits related to sleepiness, or
injuries relating to sleep deprivation. An
important role for school nurses is to educate
the public and adolescents about adolescent
sleep requirements. This might be done by
writing articles in school newspapers, local
newspaper editorials, or television news
reports -
even in popular magazines -
by starting a web page on the Internet to
I Journal of@ool Nuning August 1999
inform others of the serious sleep deficit
most adolescents experience and what can be
done to help them obtain more sleep. The
importance of sleep for optimal health is
undeniable. If adolescents learn to acknowl-
edge their sleep needs and improve their
sleep habits, they may be happier, healthier,
safer, and more productive during their ado-
lescent years.•
REFERENCES
Anch, A.M., Browman, C.P., Mitlcr, M.M., & Walsh,
J.K. (1988). Sutp: A sdmtific pmpective. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Brczler, G.D. (1999). Injuries in adolescent workers,
health promotion and prmwy prevention. AAOHN.
4,7(2), 57-64.
Carskadon, M.A. (1989-1990). Adolescent slccpin=:
increased risk in a high-risk population. AkohoL Drug.r
and Driving, 5(4)/6(1), 317-328.
Carskadon, M.A. (1990). Patterns of sleepiness in
adolescents. Peduztrician, l ?(I), 5-12.
Carskadon, M.A., Wolfson, A.R, Tzischinsky, 0., &
Acebo, C. (1995). Early school schedules modify ado-
lescent slccpin=. Sutp &search, 24. 92.
Epstein, R, Chillag, N., & Lavic, P. (1998). Starting
times of school: effects on daytime functioning of
fifth-grade children in Isnd. Sleep, 21(3), 250-256.
Hauri, P. (1991). No mort: sutplns nights. New York:
John Wtley & Sons.
Mahon, N.E. (1995). The contributions of sleep to
perceived heal ch status during adolescence. P,.bJic
Health N"rsing, 12'.2), 127-133.
Murray, R.B. & Zentner, J.P. (1997). Health assess-
ment and promotion stmtegies thrrn,gh the lift span (6th
ed.) Scarnford, CT: Appleton & Lange.
National Institute fur Occupational Safety and Health
(NIOSH). (1997). Arc You a Working Teen? What
You Should Know About Safety and Health on the
Job (DHHS Publication No. 97-132). Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Stnuch, I. & Meier, B. (1988). Sleep need in adoles-
cents: a longitudinal approach. Sutp, 11(4), 378-386.
Thomas, C.L (Ed.). (1977). Taber's cyclopedic medical
d;ctionary (13th ed.). Philaddphia: F.A. Davis.
Wolfson, A.R (1996). Sleeping patterns of children
and adolescents: developmental trends, disruptions,
and adaptations. Child and AJouscmt Psychiatric Clin-
ics of Nonh Amnica, 5(3), 549-568.
Barrett Ubraf'/camPus
A\\en college
Waterloo, \owa
Wolfson, A.R. & Carskadon, M.A. (1998). Sleep
schedules and daytime functioning in adolescents.
Child Development, 6~4), 875-887.
Yarcheski, A. & Mahon, N.E. (1994). A study of sleep
during adolescence. Jo"mai of Peduztric N"rsing: N"rs-
ing Cart: of Childmi and Families, ~6), 357-367.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Betty B. Kelman, RN, MN is a part-time Clinical
Instructor in the Undergraduate Nursing Program,
University of Washington, and a substitute school
nurse in Bothell, Washington.
Recipient of NIOSH (National Institute for Occupa-
tional Health and Safety) Educational and Research
Center Training Gnnt, 1997, 1998, and 1999.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The author of this article was supported by Training
Gnnt No. OH0/7087-22 from the Centers fur Dis-
ease Control and Prevention/National Institute for
Occupational Safery and Health. The contents arc
soldy the rcsponsibiliry of the author and do not ncc-
cssatily represent the official views of the National
Institute fur Occupational Safcry and Health.
Volume 15, Number 3 ! 19