  
   
.'*)( )-.'./.#- *$ #(.&
	 
	
  	

 
	
 

 
  
	 
 
.'*)( )-.'./.# *) ,/%  /-#
 
 

 
 
*$'&% &)*$*+* ) '!  %*#
*$'&% &)*$*+* '& (+"
 - +*$, '+% ,(
*# ) (.%& 	
	 
	
	 
	
  	

 
	
 

 
  
	 
 
*$'&% &)*$*+* '& (+"
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Karen L. Bierman, Ph.D.
Pennsylvania State University
C. Hendricks Brown, Ph.D.
University of South Florida
Richard R. Clayton, Ph.D.
University of Kentucky
Thomas J. Dishion, Ph.D.
University of Oregon
E. Michael Foster, Ph.D.
Pennsylvania State University
Meyer D. Glantz, Ph.D.
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Mark T. Greenberg, Ph.D.
Pennsylvania State University
Hyman Hops, Ph.D.
Oregon Research Institute
Eugene R. Oetting, Ph.D.
Colorado State University
Zili Sloboda, Sc.D.
University of Akron
Richard Spoth, Ph.D.
Iowa State University
John B. Reid, Ph.D.
Oregon Social Learning Center
Thomas A. Wills, Ph.D.
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
NIDA also would like to thank the Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of America for helping organize
a focus group of community leaders in reviewing this publication.
This publication was written by Elizabeth B. Robertson, Ph.D., Susan L. David, M.P.H. (retired), and
Suman A. Rao, Ph.D., National Institute on Drug Abuse.
All materials in this volume are in the public domain and may be used or reproduced without permission
from NIDA or the authors. Citation of the source is appreciated.
The U.S. government does not endorse or favor any specific commercial product or company.
Trade, proprietary, or company names appearing in the publication are used only because they
are considered essential in the context of the studies described here.
NIH Publication No. 04-4212(A)
Printed 1997
Reprinted 1997, 1999, 2001
Second Edition October 2003
NIDA wishes to thank the following individuals for their guidance and comments during the development
and review of this publication:
Acknowledgments
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Acknowledgments
Preface
Introduction
Prevention Principles
Chapter 1: Risk Factors and Protective Factors
What are risk factors and protective factors?
What are the early signs of risk that may predict later drug abuse?
What are the highest risk periods for drug abuse among youth?
When and how does drug abuse start and progress?
Chapter 2: Planning for Drug Abuse Prevention in the Community
How can the community develop a plan for research-based prevention?
How can the community use the prevention principles in prevention planning?
How can the community assess the level of risk for drug abuse?
Is the community ready for prevention?
How can the community be motivated to implement research-based prevention programs?
How can the community assess the effectiveness of current prevention efforts?
Chapter 3: Applying Prevention Principles to Drug Abuse Prevention Programs
How are risk and protective factors addressed in prevention programs?
What are the core elements of effective research-based prevention programs?
How can the community implement and sustain effective prevention programs?
How can the community evaluate the impact of its program on drug abuse?
What are the cost-benefits of community prevention programs?
Contents
iii
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Chapter 4: Examples of Research-Based Drug Abuse Prevention Programs
Universal Programs
Elementary School
•  Caring School Community Program
•  Classroom-Centered (CC) and Family-School Partnership (FSP) Intervention
•  Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies (PATHS)
•  Skills, Opportunity, And Recognition (SOAR)
Middle School
•  Guiding Good Choices
•  Life Skills Training (LST) Program
•  Lions-Quest Skills for Adolescence (SFA)
•  Project ALERT
•  Project STAR
•  The Strengthening Families Program: For Parents and Youth 10–14 (SFP 10–14)
High School
•  Life Skills Training: Booster Program
•  Lions-Quest Skills for Adolescence
•  Project ALERT Plus
•  The Strengthening Families Program: For Parents and Youth 10–14
Selective Programs
Elementary School
•  Focus on Families (FOF)
•  The Strengthening Families Program (SFP)
Middle School
•  Coping Power
High School
•  Adolescents Training and Learning to Avoid Steroids (ATLAS)
Indicated Programs
High School
•  Project Towards No Drug Abuse (Project TND)
•  Reconnecting Youth Program (RY)
Tiered Programs
Elementary School
•  Early Risers “Skills for Success” Risk Prevention Program
•  Fast Track Prevention Trial for Conduct Problems
Middle School
•  Adolescent Transitions Program (ATP)
Chapter  5: Selected Resources and References
Selected Resources
Selected References
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Preface
Today’s youth face many risks, including drug abuse,
violence, and HIV/AIDS. Responding to these risks
before they become problems can be difficult. One
of the goals of the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA) is to help the public understand the causes
of drug abuse and to prevent its onset. Drug abuse
has serious consequences in our homes, schools,
and communities. From NIDA’s perspective, the
use of all illicit drugs and the inappropriate use of
licit drugs is considered drug abuse.
Prevention science has made great progress in recent
years. Many prevention interventions are being tested
in “real-world” settings so they can be more easily
adapted for community use. Scientists are studying
a broader range of populations and topics. They
have identified, for example, effective interventions
with younger populations to help prevent risk
behaviors before drug abuse occurs.
Researchers are also studying older teens who
are already using drugs to find ways to prevent
further abuse or addiction. Practical issues, such as
cost-benefit analyses, are being studied. Presenting
these findings to the public is one of NIDA’s most
important responsibilities.
We are pleased to offer our newest edition of the
publication, Preventing Drug Use among Children
and Adolescents: A Research-Based Guide for Parents,
Educators, and Community Leaders, Second Edition.
This edition includes updated principles, new questions
and answers, new program information, and expanded
references and resources. We also invite you to
visit our Web site at www.drugabuse.gov where
this publication and other materials related to the
consequences, prevention, and treatment of drug
abuse are offered. We hope that you will find the
guide useful and helpful to your work.
Nora D. Volkow, M.D.
Director
National Institute on Drug Abuse
National Institute on Drug Abuse
In 1997, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
published the first edition of Preventing Drug Use
among Children and Adolescents: A Research-Based
Guide to share the latest NIDA-funded prevention
research findings with parents, educators, and
community leaders. The guide introduced the concept
of “research-based prevention” with questions and
answers on risk and protective factors, community
planning and implementation, and 14 prevention
principles derived from effective drug abuse prevention
research. Examples of research-tested prevention
programs were also featured. The purpose was to help
prevention practitioners use the results of prevention
research to address drug abuse among children and
adolescents in communities across the country.
Since then, NIDA’s prevention research program has
more than doubled in size and scope to address all
stages of child development, a mix of audiences and
settings, and the delivery of effective services at the
community level. The Institute now focuses on risks
for drug abuse and other problem behaviors that
occur throughout a child’s development. Prevention
interventions designed and tested to address risks can
help children at every step along their developmental
path. Working more broadly with families, schools,
and communities, scientists have found effective ways
to help people gain the skills and approaches to stop
problem behaviors before they occur. Research funded
by NIDA and other Federal research organizations—
such as the National Institute of Mental Health and
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention—
shows that early intervention can prevent many
adolescent risk behaviors.
This second edition, reflecting NIDA’s expanded
research program and knowledge base, is more than
double the size of the first edition. The prevention
principles have been expanded to provide more
understanding about the latest research, and principles
relevant to each chapter accompany the discussion.
Additional questions and answers, a new chapter
on community planning, and more information
on the core elements in research-based prevention
programs have been added. Each chapter ends with
a “Community Action Box” for primary readers—
parents, educators, and community leaders. As in the
first edition, the descriptions of prevention programs
are presented as examples of research-based
programs currently available.
The expanded Selected Resources section offers Web
sites, sponsored by Federal and private-sector agencies.
Some feature registries of effective prevention
programs with agency-specific selection criteria
and other resources for community planning. The
Selected References section includes up-to-date books
and journal articles that provide more information
on prevention research. NIDA hopes that this revised
guide is helpful to drug abuse prevention efforts among
children and adolescents in homes, schools, and
communities nationwide.
Introduction
Prevention Principles
These revised prevention principles have emerged from research studies funded by NIDA on the origins of drug
abuse behaviors and the common elements found in research on effective prevention programs. Parents, educators,
and community leaders can use these principles to help guide their thinking, planning, selection, and delivery of
drug abuse prevention programs at the community level. The references following each principle are representative
of current research.
Risk Factors and Protective Factors
Prevention programs should
enhance protective factors and reverse or reduce
risk factors (Hawkins et al. 2002).
• The risk of becoming a drug abuser involves the
relationship among the number and type of
risk factors (e.g., deviant attitudes and behaviors)
and protective factors (e.g., parental support)
(Wills and McNamara et al. 1996).
• The potential impact of specific risk and
protective factors changes with age. For
example, risk factors within the family have
greater impact on a younger child, while
association with drug-abusing peers may be a
more significant risk factor for an adolescent
(Gerstein and Green 1993; Kumpfer et al. 1998).
• Early intervention with risk factors (e.g.,
aggressive behavior and poor self-control)
often has a greater impact than later
intervention by changing a child’s life path
(trajectory) away from problems and toward
positive behaviors (Ialongo et al. 2001).
• While risk and protective factors can affect
people of all groups, these factors can have
a different effect depending on a person’s age,
gender, ethnicity, culture, and environment
(Beauvais et al. 1996; Moon et al. 1999).
Prevention programs should address
all forms of drug abuse, alone or in combination,
including the underage use of legal drugs (e.g.,
tobacco or alcohol); the use of illegal drugs (e.g.,
marijuana or heroin); and the inappropriate use
of legally obtained substances (e.g., inhalants),
prescription medications, or over-the-counter
drugs (Johnston et al. 2002).
Prevention programs should
address the type of drug abuse problem in the
local community, target modifiable risk factors,
and strengthen identified protective factors
(Hawkins et al. 2002).
Prevention programs should be
tailored to address risks specific to population
or audience characteristics, such as age, gender,
and ethnicity, to improve program effectiveness
(Oetting et al. 1997).
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
PRINCIPLE 1
PRINCIPLE 2
PRINCIPLE 3
PRINCIPLE 4
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Prevention Planning
Family Programs
Family-based prevention programs
should enhance family bonding and relationships
and include parenting skills; practice in developing,
discussing, and enforcing family policies on
substance abuse; and training in drug education
and information (Ashery et al. 1998).
Family bonding is the bedrock of the relationship
between parents and children. Bonding can
be strengthened through skills training on
parent supportiveness of children, parent-child
communication, and parental involvement
(Kosterman et al. 1997).
• Parental monitoring and supervision are
critical for drug abuse prevention. These skills
can be enhanced with training on rule-setting;
techniques for monitoring activities; praise
for appropriate behavior; and moderate,
consistent discipline that enforces defined
family rules (Kosterman et al. 2001).
• Drug education and information for parents
or caregivers reinforces what children
are learning about the harmful effects of
drugs and opens opportunities for family
discussions about the abuse of legal and
illegal substances (Bauman et al. 2001).
• Brief, family-focused interventions for the
general population can positively change
specific parenting behavior that can reduce
later risks of drug abuse (Spoth et al. 2002b).
School Programs
Prevention programs can be
designed to intervene as early as preschool
to address risk factors for drug abuse, such
as aggressive behavior, poor social skills, and
academic difficulties (Webster-Stratton 1998;
Webster-Stratton et al. 2001).
Prevention programs for elementary
school children should target improving academic
and social-emotional learning to address risk
factors for drug abuse, such as early aggression,
academic failure, and school dropout. Education
should focus on the following skills (Ialongo
et al. 2001; Conduct Problems Prevention Work
Group 2002b):
• self-control;
• emotional awareness;
• communication;
• social problem-solving; and
• academic support, especially in reading.
Prevention programs for middle or
junior high and high school students should increase
academic and social competence with the following
skills (Botvin et al.1995; Scheier et al. 1999):
• study habits and academic support;
• communication;
• peer relationships;
• self-efficacy and assertiveness;
• drug resistance skills;
• reinforcement of antidrug attitudes; and
• strengthening of personal commitments
against drug abuse.
PRINCIPLE 5
PRINCIPLE 6
PRINCIPLE 7
PRINCIPLE 8
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Community Programs
Prevention programs aimed at
general populations at key transition points, such
as the transition to middle school, can produce
beneficial effects even among high-risk families
and children. Such interventions do not single
out risk populations and, therefore, reduce labeling
and promote bonding to school and community
(Botvin et al. 1995; Dishion et al. 2002).
Community prevention programs
that combine two or more effective programs,
such as family-based and school-based
programs, can be more effective than a single
program alone (Battistich et al. 1997).
Community prevention programs
reaching populations in multiple settings—for
example, schools, clubs, faith-based organizations,
and the media—are most effective when they
present consistent, community-wide messages
in each setting (Chou et al. 1998).
Prevention Program Delivery
When communities adapt programs
to match their needs, community norms, or
differing cultural requirements, they should retain
core elements of the original research-based
intervention (Spoth et al. 2002b), which include:
• Structure (how the program is organized
and constructed);
• Content (the information, skills, and strategies
of the program); and
• Delivery (how the program is adapted,
implemented, and evaluated).
Prevention programs should be
long-term with repeated interventions (i.e.,
booster programs) to reinforce the original
prevention goals. Research shows that the
benefits from middle school prevention programs
diminish without followup programs in high
school (Scheier et al. 1999).
PRINCIPLE 10
PRINCIPLE 9
PRINCIPLE 11
PRINCIPLE 12
PRINCIPLE 13
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Prevention programs should include
teacher training on good classroom management
practices, such as rewarding appropriate student
behavior. Such techniques help to foster students’
positive behavior, achievement, academic motivation,
and school bonding (Ialongo et al. 2001).
Prevention programs are most
effective when they employ interactive techniques,
such as peer discussion groups and parent
role-playing, that allow for active involvement in
learning about drug abuse and reinforcing skills
(Botvin et al. 1995).
Research-based prevention programs
can be cost-effective. Similar to earlier research,
recent research shows that for each dollar invested
in prevention, a savings of up to $10 in treatment
for alcohol or other substance abuse can be seen
(Pentz 1998; Hawkins 1999; Aos et al. 2001;
Spoth et al. 2002a).
PRINCIPLE 14
PRINCIPLE 15
PRINCIPLE 16
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Chapter 1: Risk Factors and Protective Factors
This chapter describes how risk and protective factors influence drug abuse behaviors, the early signs of risk,
transitions as high-risk periods, and general patterns of drug abuse among children and adolescents. A major
focus is how prevention programs can strengthen protection or intervene to reduce risks.
What are risk factors
and protective factors?
Studies over the past two decades have tried to
determine the origins and pathways of drug abuse
and addiction—how the problem starts and how it
progresses. Many factors have been identified that
help differentiate those more likely to abuse drugs
from those less vulnerable to drug abuse. Factors
associated with greater potential for drug abuse are
called “risk” factors, while those associated with
reduced potential for abuse are called “protective”
factors. Please note, however, that most individuals
at risk for drug abuse do not start using drugs or
become addicted. Also, a risk factor for one person
may not be for another.
As discussed in the Introduction, risk and protective
factors can affect children in a developmental risk
trajectory, or path. This path captures how risks
become evident at different stages of a child’s life.
For example, early risks, such as out-of-control
aggressive behavior, may be seen in a very young
child. If not addressed through positive parental
actions, this behavior can lead to additional risks
when the child enters school. Aggressive behavior
in school can lead to rejection by peers, punishment
by teachers, and academic failure. Again, if not
addressed through preventive interventions, these
risks can lead to the most immediate behaviors that
put a child at risk for drug abuse, such as skipping
school and associating with peers who abuse drugs. In
focusing on the risk path, research-based prevention
programs can intervene early in a child’s development
to strengthen protective factors and reduce risks long
before problem behaviors develop.
The table below provides a framework for
characterizing risk and protective factors in five
domains, or settings. These domains can then serve
as a focus for prevention. As the first two examples
suggest, some risk and protective factors are mutually
exclusive—the presence of one means the absence
of the other. For example, in the Individual domain,
early aggressive behavior, a risk factor, indicates the
absence of impulse control, a key protective factor.
Helping a young child learn to control impulsive
behavior is a focus of some prevention programs.
Early Aggressive Behavior                              Individual                                     Impulse Control
Lack of Parental Supervision                              Family                                    Parental Monitoring
Substance Abuse                                         Peer                                    Academic Competence
Drug Availability                                        School                                    Antidrug Use Policies
Poverty                                          Community                     Strong Neighborhood Attachment
Risk Factors                                         Domain                                     Protective Factors
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Other risk and protective factors are independent of
each other, as demonstrated in the table as examples
in the peer, school, and community domains. For
example, in the school domain, drugs may be
available, even though the school has “antidrug
policies.” An intervention may be to strengthen
enforcement so that school policies create the
intended school environment.
Risk factors for drug abuse represent challenges
to an individual’s emotional, social, and academic
development. These risk factors can produce different
effects, depending on the individual’s personality
traits, phase of development, and environment.
For instance, many serious risks, such as early
aggressive behavior and poor academic achievement,
may indicate that a young child is on a negative
developmental path headed toward problem behavior.
Early intervention, however, can help reduce or reverse
these risks and change that child’s developmental path.
For young children already exhibiting
serious risk factors, delaying intervention
until adolescence will likely make it more
difficult to overcome risks. By adolescence,
children’s attitudes and behaviors are well
established and not easily changed.
Risk factors can influence drug abuse in several
ways. They may be additive: The more risks a
child is exposed to, the more likely the child will
abuse drugs. Some risk factors are particularly
potent, yet may not influence drug abuse unless
certain conditions prevail. Having a family history
of substance abuse, for example, puts a child at
risk for drug abuse. However, in an environment
with no drug-abusing peers and strong antidrug
norms, that child is less likely to become a drug
abuser. And the presence of many protective
factors can lessen the impact of a few risk factors.
For example, strong protection—such as parental
support and involvement—can reduce the influence
of strong risks, such as having substance-abusing
peers. An important goal of prevention, then,
is to change the balance between risk and
protective factors so that protective factors
outweigh risk factors.
Chapter 1 Principles
Risk Factors and
Protective Factors
Prevention programs should enhance
protective factors and reverse or reduce risk factors.
• The risk of becoming a drug abuser involves the
relationship among the number and type of risk factors
(e.g., deviant attitudes and behaviors) and protective
factors  (e.g., parental support).
• The potential impact of specific risk and protective
factors changes with age. For example, risk factors
within the family have greater impact on a younger
child, while association with drug-abusing peers may
be  a more significant risk factor for an adolescent.
• Early intervention with risk factors (e.g., aggressive
behavior and poor self-control) often has a greater
impact than later intervention by changing a child’s
life path (trajectory) away from problems and toward
positive behaviors.
• While risk and protective factors can affect people of
all groups, these factors can have a different effect
depending on a person’s age, gender, ethnicity, culture,
and environment.
Prevention programs should address all
forms of drug abuse, alone or in combination, including
the underage use of legal drugs (e.g., tobacco or alcohol);
the use of illegal drugs (e.g., marijuana or heroin); and the
inappropriate use of legally obtained substances (e.g., inhalants),
prescription medications, or over-the-counter drugs.
Prevention programs should address the
type of drug abuse problem in the local community, target
modifiable risk factors, and strengthen identified
protective factors.
Prevention programs should be tailored
to address risks specific to population or audience
characteristics, such as age, gender, and ethnicity,
to improve program effectiveness.
PRINCIPLE 1
PRINCIPLE 2
PRINCIPLE 3
PRINCIPLE 4
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Gender may also determine how an individual
responds to risk factors. Research on relationships
within the family shows that adolescent girls respond
positively to parental support and discipline, while
adolescent boys sometimes respond negatively.
Research on early risk behaviors in the school setting
shows that aggressive behavior in boys and learning
difficulties in girls are the primary causes of poor peer
relationships. These poor relationships, in turn, can
lead to social rejection, a negative school experience,
and problem behaviors including drug abuse.
What are the early signs of risk that
may predict later drug abuse?
Some signs of risk can be seen as early as infancy.
Children’s personality traits or temperament can
place them at increased risk for later drug abuse.
Withdrawn and aggressive boys, for example, often
exhibit problem behaviors in interactions with their
families, peers, and others they encounter in social
settings. If these behaviors continue, they will likely
lead to other risks. These risks can include academic
failure, early peer rejection, and later affiliation with
deviant peers, often the most immediate risk for drug
abuse in adolescence. Studies have shown that children
with poor academic performance and inappropriate
social behavior at ages 7 to 9 are more likely to be
involved with substance abuse by age 14 or 15.
In the Family
Children’s earliest interactions occur within the
family and can be positive or negative. For this
reason, factors that affect early development in the
family are probably the most crucial. Children are
more likely to experience risk when there is:
• lack of mutual attachment and nurturing
by parents or caregivers;
• ineffective parenting;
• a chaotic home environment;
• lack of a significant relationship with
a caring adult; and
• a caregiver who abuses substances, suffers from
mental illness, or engages in criminal behavior.
These experiences, especially the abuse of drugs and
other substances by parents and other caregivers, can
impede bonding to the family and threaten feelings of
security that children need for healthy development.
On the other hand, families can serve a protective
function when there is:
• a strong bond between children and their families;
• parental involvement in a child’s life;
• supportive parenting that meets financial,
emotional, cognitive, and social needs; and
• clear limits and consistent enforcement of discipline.
Finally, critical or sensitive periods in development
may heighten the importance of risk or protective
factors. For example, mutual attachment and bonding
between parents and children usually occurs in infancy
and early childhood. If it fails to occur during those
developmental stages, it is unlikely that a strong positive
attachment will develop later in the child’s life.
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Outside the Family
Other risk factors relate to the quality of children’s
relationships in settings outside the family, such as
in their schools, with their peers, teachers, and in
the community. Difficulties in these settings can be
crucial to a child’s emotional, cognitive, and social
development. Some of these risk factors are:
• inappropriate classroom behavior, such
as aggression and impulsivity;
• academic failure;
• poor social coping skills;
• association with peers with problem behaviors,
including drug abuse; and
• misperceptions of the extent and acceptability
of drug-abusing behaviors in school, peer, and
community environments.
Association with drug-abusing peers is often the
most immediate risk for exposing adolescents to
drug abuse and delinquent behavior. Research has
shown, however, that addressing such behavior in
interventions can be challenging. For example, a
recent study (Dishion et al. 2002) found that placing
high-risk youth in a peer group intervention resulted
in negative outcomes. Current research is exploring
the role that adults and positive peers can play in
helping to avoid such outcomes in future interventions.
Other factors—such as drug availability, drug
trafficking patterns, and beliefs that drug abuse is
generally tolerated—are also risks that can influence
young people to start to abuse drugs.
Family has an important role in providing protection
for children when they are involved in activities
outside the family. When children are outside the
family setting, the most salient protective factors are:
• age-appropriate parental monitoring of social
behavior, including establishing curfews, ensuring
adult supervision of activities outside the home,
knowing the child’s friends, and enforcing
household rules;
• success in academics and involvement
in extracurricular activities;
• strong bonds with prosocial institutions, such
as school and religious institutions; and
• acceptance of conventional norms against
drug abuse.
What are the highest risk periods
for drug abuse among youth?
Research has shown that the key risk periods
for drug abuse occur during major transitions in
children’s lives. These transitions include significant
changes in physical development (for example,
puberty) or social situations (such as moving
or parents divorcing) when children experience
heightened vulnerability for problem behaviors.
The first big transition for children is when they leave
the security of the family and enter school. Later,
when they advance from elementary school to middle
or junior high school, they often experience new
academic and social situations, such as learning to
get along with a wider group of peers and having
greater expectations for academic performance. It
is at this stage—early adolescence—that children
are likely to encounter drug abuse for the first time.
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Then, when they enter high school, young people face
additional social, psychological, and educational
challenges. At the same time, they may be exposed
to greater availability of drugs, drug abusers, and
social engagements involving drugs. These challenges
can increase the risk that they will abuse alcohol,
tobacco, and other drugs.
A particularly challenging situation in late adolescence
is moving away from home for the first time without
parental supervision, perhaps to attend college or
other schooling. Substance abuse, particularly of
alcohol, remains a major public health problem for
college populations.
When young adults enter the workforce or marry,
they again confront new challenges and stressors
that may place them at risk for alcohol and other
drug abuse in their adult environments. But these
challenges can also be protective when they present
opportunities for young people to grow and pursue
future goals and interests. Research has shown that
these new lifestyles can serve as protective factors
as the new roles become more important than being
involved with drugs.
Risks appear at every transition from early
childhood through young adulthood; therefore,
prevention planners need to consider their
target audiences and implement programs
that provide support appropriate for each
developmental stage. They also need to
consider how the protective factors involved
in these transitions can be strengthened.
When and how does drug abuse
start and progress?
Studies such as the National Survey on Drug Use
and Health, formerly called the National Household
Survey on Drug Abuse, reported by the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration,
indicate that some children are already abusing
drugs by age 12 or 13, which likely means that some
may begin even earlier. Early abuse includes such
drugs as tobacco, alcohol, inhalants, marijuana,
and psychotherapeutic drugs. If drug abuse persists
into later adolescence, abusers typically become
more involved with marijuana and then advance
to other illegal drugs, while continuing their abuse
of tobacco and alcohol. Studies have also shown
that early initiation of drug abuse is associated
with greater drug involvement, whether with the
same or different drugs. Note, however, that both
one-time and long-term surveys indicate that most
youth do not progress to abusing other drugs. But
among those who do progress, their drug abuse
history can vary by neighborhood drug availability,
demographic groups, and other characteristics of the
abuser population. In general, the pattern of abuse is
associated with levels of social disapproval, perceived
risk, and the availability of drugs in the community.
Scientists have proposed several hypotheses as to
why individuals first become involved with drugs
and then escalate to abuse. One explanation is a
biological cause, such as having a family history
of drug or alcohol abuse, which may genetically
predispose a person to drug abuse. Another
explanation is that starting to abuse a drug may
lead to affiliation with more drug-abusing peers
which, in turn, exposes the individual to other
drugs. Indeed, many factors may be involved.
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Parents can use information on risk and
protection to help them develop positive
preventive actions (e.g. talking about family
rules) before problems occur.
Educators can strengthen learning and bonding to
school by addressing aggressive behaviors and
poor concentration—risks associated with later
onset of drug abuse and related problems.
Community Leaders can assess community
risk and protective factors associated with
drug problems to best target prevention services.
COMMUNITY ACTION BOX
Different patterns of drug initiation have been
identified based on gender, race or ethnicity, and
geographic location. For example, research has found
that the circumstances in which young people are
offered drugs can depend on gender. Boys generally
receive more drug offers and at younger ages. Initial
drug abuse can also be influenced by where drugs
are offered, such as parks, streets, schools, homes,
or parties. Additionally, drugs may be offered by
different people including, for example, siblings,
friends, or even parents.
While most youth do not progress beyond initial
use, a small percentage rapidly escalate their
substance abuse. Researchers have found that these
youth are the most likely to have experienced a
combination of high levels of risk factors with low
levels of protective factors. These adolescents were
characterized by high stress, low parental support,
and low academic competence.
However, there are protective factors that can
suppress the escalation to substance abuse. These
factors include self-control, which tends to inhibit
problem behavior and often increases naturally as
children mature during adolescence. In addition,
protective family structure, individual personality,
and environmental variables can reduce the impact
of serious risks of drug abuse. Preventive interventions
can provide skills and support to high-risk youth
to enhance levels of protective factors and prevent
escalation to drug abuse.
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Chapter 2: Planning for Drug Abuse Prevention
in the Community
This chapter presents a process to help communities as they plan to implement research-based prevention
programs. It provides guidance on applying the prevention principles, assessing needs and community readiness,
motivating the community to take action, and evaluating the impact of the programs implemented. Additional
planning resources are highlighted in Selected Resources and References.
How can the community develop a plan
for research-based prevention?
Prevention research suggests that a well-constructed
community plan incorporates the characteristics
outlined in the following box.
Planning Process
Planning usually starts with an assessment of drug
abuse and other child and adolescent problems,
which includes measuring the level of substance
abuse in the community as well as examining the
level of other community risk factors (e.g., poverty)
[see section on “How can the community assess
the level of risk for drug abuse?” for more details].
The results of the assessment can be used to raise
community awareness of the nature and seriousness
of the problem and guide the selection of programs
most relevant to the community’s needs. This is an
important process, whether a community is selecting
a school-based prevention curriculum or planning
multiple interventions that cut across the
entire community.
Next, an assessment of the community’s readiness
for prevention can help determine additional steps
that are needed to educate the community before
beginning the prevention effort. Then, a review
of existing programs is needed to determine gaps
in addressing community needs and identifying
additional resources.
Finally, community planning can benefit from
contributions of community organizations that
provide services to youth. Convening a meeting
of leaders of youth-serving organizations can aid in
coordinating ideas, resources, and expertise to help
implement and sustain research-based programs.
Planning for implementation and sustainability requires
resource development for staffing and management,
long-term funding commitments, and linkages with
existing delivery systems.
How can the community use the
prevention principles in
prevention planning?
Several prevention principles provide a framework
for effective prevention planning and programming
by presenting key concepts in implementing research-
THE COMMUNITY PLAN
• Identifies the specific drugs and other child
and adolescent problems in a community;
• Builds on existing resources (e.g., current drug abuse
prevention programs);
• Develops short-term goals relevant to implementation
of research-based prevention programs;
• Projects long-term objectives so that plans and
resources are available for the future; and
• Incorporates ongoing assessments to evaluate the
effectiveness of prevention strategies.
National Institute on Drug Abuse
based prevention. Consider, for example, Principle 3:
“Prevention programs should address the type of
drug abuse problem in the local community, target
modifiable risk factors, and strengthen identified
protective factors.” This principle describes how the
plan should reflect the reality of the drug problem in
that community and, importantly, what needs to be
done to address it.
Community-wide efforts also can be guided by
Principle 9: “Prevention programs aimed at general
populations at key transition points . . . can produce
beneficial effects, even among high-risk families and
children.” With carefully structured programs, the
community can provide services to all populations,
including those at high risk, without labeling or
stigmatizing them.
In implementing a more specific program, such as
a family program within the educational system,
the principles address some of the required content
areas. For instance, Principle 5 states, “Family-based
prevention programs should enhance family bonding
and relationships and include parenting skills; practice
in developing, discussing, and enforcing family policies
on substance abuse; and training in drug education
and information.”
The principles offer guidance for selecting or adapting
effective programs that meet specific community needs.
It is important to recognize, however, that
not every program that seems consistent with
these research-based prevention principles is
necessarily effective. To be effective, programs
need to incorporate the core elements identified in
research (see Chapter 3). These include appropriate
structure and content, adequate resources for training
and materials, and other implementation requirements.
For more information on resources to help communities
in prevention planning and the research underlying
the prevention principles, see Selected Resources
and References.
Principles for Prevention Planning
Prevention programs should address all
forms of drug abuse, alone or in combination, including
the underage use of legal drugs (e.g., tobacco or alcohol);
the use of illegal drugs (e.g., marijuana or heroin); and the
inappropriate use of legally obtained substances (e.g., inhalants),
prescription medications, or over-the-counter drugs.
Prevention programs should address the
type of drug abuse problem in the local community, target
modifiable risk factors, and strengthen identified
protective factors.
Prevention programs should be tailored
to address risks specific to population or audience
characteristics, such as age, gender, and ethnicity,
to improve program effectiveness.
Prevention programs aimed at general
populations at key transition points, such as the transition
to middle school, can produce beneficial effects even
among high-risk families and children. Such interventions
do not single out risk populations and, therefore, reduce
labeling and promote bonding to school and community.
Community prevention programs that
combine two or more effective programs, such as family-
based and school-based programs, can be more effective
than a single program alone.
Community prevention programs reaching
populations in multiple settings—for example, schools,
clubs, faith-based organizations, and the media—are most
effective when they present consistent, community-wide
messages in each setting.
Chapter 2 Principles
PRINCIPLE 2
PRINCIPLE 3
PRINCIPLE 4
PRINCIPLE 9
PRINCIPLE 10
PRINCIPLE 11
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
How can the community assess the
level of risk for drug abuse?
To assess the level of risk of youth engaging in drug
abuse, it is important to:
• measure the nature and extent of drug abuse
patterns and trends;
• collect data on the risk and protective factors
throughout the community;
• understand the community’s culture and how that
culture affects and is affected by drug abuse;
• consult with community leaders working in drug
abuse prevention, treatment, law enforcement,
mental health, and related areas;
• assess community awareness of the problem; and
• identify existing prevention efforts already under
way to address the problem.
Researchers have developed many tools to assess
the extent of a community’s drug problem. Most of
these tools assess the nature of the problem—what
drugs are available and who is abusing them. Some
of them assess the extent of abuse by estimating
how many people are abusing drugs. Others assess
factors associated with abuse, such as juvenile
delinquency, school absenteeism, and school dropout
rates. Researchers have also developed instruments
that assess individual risk status. It is important
when beginning the assessment process to collect
sufficient information to help local planners target
the intervention by population and geographic area.
As an example, the Communities That Care prevention
operating system, developed by Hawkins and colleagues
at the University of Washington (Hawkins et al. 2002),
is based on epidemiological methods. An assessment
is conducted to collect data on the distribution of risk
and protective factors at the community level. This
approach helps local planners identify geographic
areas with the highest levels of risk and the lowest
levels of protective resources. This analysis tool
assists planners in selecting the most effective
prevention interventions to address the specific
risks of neighborhoods.
Other data sources and measurement instruments
(such as questionnaires) that can help in community
planning include the following resources.
• Public access data. Several large national
surveys provide data to help local communities
understand how their drug problems relate to
the national picture. These include the National
Survey on Drug Use and Health, Monitoring the
Future Study, and Youth Behavior Risk Study.
Information on accessing these data is provided
in Selected Resources and References.
• Public access questionnaires. The studies listed
above and many other federally sponsored data sets
make the data collection instruments available for
adaptation and use by the public. Communities
can conduct local studies using these instruments
to collect uniform data that can often be compared
with national findings.
• Archival data. Data from public access files
from school systems, health departments, hospital
emergency rooms, law enforcement agencies, and
drug abuse treatment facilities can be analyzed to
identify the nature of the local drug problem and
other youth problems.
National Institute on Drug Abuse
• Ethnographic studies. Ethnographic approaches
use systematic, observational processes to describe
behaviors in natural settings, such as studying the
abuse of drugs by youth gangs, and documenting
the individual perspectives of those under observation.
• Other qualitative methods. Other qualitative
methods, such as convening focus groups of
representatives of drug-abusing subpopulations
or key interviews with community officials, can
be used to gain a greater understanding of the
local drug abuse problem.
As each of these methods has advantages and
disadvantages, it is advisable, permitting resources,
to use multiple strategies to assess community risk
to provide the best information possible.
The Community Epidemiology Work Group (CEWG),
another data source pioneered in the early 1970s by
NIDA and communities nationwide, is composed
of researchers from 21 U.S. cities who collect or use
archival data to characterize the nature of the drug
problem in their locations. CEWG representatives
meet with NIDA biannually to inform the Institute
and fellow CEWG members of changing drug trends
in their cities. The work group has developed a
Guide for Community Epidemiology Surveillance
Networks on Drug Abuse to help other communities
use this approach to provide up-to-date information
on local drug abuse problems.
Using information obtained through these many
sources can help community leaders make sound
decisions about programs and policies. Analyzing
these data before implementing new programs can
also help establish a baseline for evaluating results.
To be most informative, periodic assessments need
to be made routinely.
For more information on how communities can
assess the level or risk of drug abuse in their
community, see Selected Resources and References.
Is the community ready for prevention?
Identifying a serious level of risk in a community
does not always translate into community readiness
to take action. Based on studies of many small
communities, researchers have identified nine stages
of readiness that can guide prevention planning
(Plested et al. 1999). Applying measures to assess
readiness, prevention planners can then identify the
critical steps needed to implement programs (see
table on page 20). Although much of the research
on the stages of community readiness has examined
small communities, large communities find that
these stages provide a structure to describe levels
of awareness of drug issues in their community
and readiness to embrace a prevention program.
Awareness is assessed at two levels: that of the public
(by examining the nature and level of drug coverage
in the news) and that of officials (by determining
if they have taken a position on drug abuse
in the community).
Community leaders can begin assessing their
community’s readiness by interviewing key
informants in their community. Additional
planning and program sources can be found in
Selected Resources and References. Web sites,
contact information, and publications offer further
information to guide community efforts.
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
How can the community be motivated
to implement research-based
prevention programs?
The methods needed to motivate a community to
act depend on the particular community’s stage of
readiness. At lower stages of readiness, individual
and small group meetings may be needed to attract
support from those with great influence in the
community. At higher levels of readiness, it may be
possible to establish a community board or coalition
of key leaders from public- and private-sector
organizations. This can provide the impetus for action.
Community coalitions can and do hold community-
wide meetings, develop public education campaigns,
present data that support the need for research-based
prevention programming, and attract sponsors for
comprehensive drug abuse prevention strategies.
But care is needed in organizing a community-level
coalition to ensure that its programming incorporates
research-tested strategies and programs—at the
individual, school, and community levels. Having a
supportive infrastructure that includes representatives
across the community can reinforce prevention
messages, provide resources, and sustain prevention
programming. Introducing a school-based curriculum,
however, requires less community involvement, but is
still a focused preventive effort.
Research has shown that prevention programs
can use the media to raise public awareness
of the seriousness of a community’s drug
problem and prevent drug abuse among
specific populations. Using local data and speakers
from the community demonstrates that the drug
problem is real and that action is needed. Providing
some of the examples of research-based programs
described in Chapter 4 can help mobilize the
community for change.
ASSESSING READINESS*
COMMUNITY ACTION
Community Response
Relative tolerance of drug abuse
Not happening here, can’t do
anything about it
Awareness, but no motivation
Leaders aware, some motivation
Active energetic leadership
and decisionmaking
Data used to support
prevention actions
Community generally supports
existing program
Decisionmakers support improving
or expanding programs
Knowledgeable of community drug
problem; expect effective solutions
Ideas
Create motivation. Meet with community
leaders involved with drug abuse prevention;
use the media to identify and talk about the
problem; encourage the community to see
how it relates to community issues; begin
preplanning.
Work together. Develop plans for prevention
programming through coalitions and other
community groups.
Identify and implement research-based programs.
Evaluate and improve ongoing programs.
Institutionalize and expand programs to reach
more populations.
Put multicomponent programs in place for
all audiences.
* Plested et al. 1999.
Readiness Stage
1. No awareness
2. Denial
3. Vague awareness
4. Preplanning
5. Preparation
6. Initiation
7. Stabilization
8. Confirmation/
9. Professionalization
Expansion
National Institute on Drug Abuse
How can the community assess
the effectiveness of current
prevention efforts?
Assessing prevention efforts can be challenging for
a community, given limited resources and limited
access to expertise in program evaluation. Many
communities begin the process with a structured
review of current prevention programs to determine:
a What programs are currently in place
in the community?
a Were strict scientific standards used to test
the programs during their development?
a Do the programs match community needs?
a Are the programs being carried out as designed?
a What percentage of at-risk youth is being
reached by the program?
Another evaluation approach is to track existing
data over time on drug abuse among students in
school, rates of truancy, school suspensions, drug-
abuse arrests, and drug-related emergency room
admissions. The use of the information obtained in
the initial community drug abuse assessment can
serve as a baseline for measuring change in long-
term trends. Because the nature and extent of drug
abuse problems can change with time, it is wise to
periodically assess community risk and protective
factors to help ensure that the programs in place
appropriately address current community needs.
Communities may wish to consult with State and
county prevention authorities for assistance in planning
and implementation efforts. Also, federally supported
publications and other resources are available,
as noted in Selected Resources and References.
In assessing the impact of individual programs, it is
important for communities to document how well
the program is delivered and the level of intervention
participants receive. For example, in assessing a
school-based prevention program, key questions
to be asked include:
a Have the teachers mastered the content and
interactive teaching strategies needed for the
selected curriculum?
a How much exposure have the students had
to each content area?
a Is there an assessment component?
The community plan should guide actions for prevention
over time. Once communities are mobilized, program
implementation and sustainability require clear,
measurable goals, long-term resources, sustained
leadership, and community support to maintain
momentum for preventive change. Continuing
evaluations keep the community informed and
allow for periodic reassessment of needs and goals.
Parents can work with others in their community
to increase awareness about the local drug
abuse problem and the need for research-based
prevention programs.
Educators can work with others in their school
and school system to review current programs,
and identify research-based prevention
interventions appropriate for students.
Community Leaders can organize a community
group to develop a community prevention plan,
coordinate resources and activities, and support
research-based prevention in all sectors
of the community.
COMMUNITY ACTION BOX
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Chapter 3: Applying Prevention Principles to
Drug Abuse Prevention Programs
This chapter describes how the prevention principles have been applied to create effective family, school, and
community programs. It offers information on working with risk and protective factors, adapting programs while
maintaining fidelity to core elements, implementing and evaluating programs, and understanding the cost-benefits
of research-based prevention. The goal is to help communities implement research-based prevention programs.
How are risk and protective factors
addressed in prevention programs?
Risk and protective factors are the primary targets
of effective prevention programs used in the family,
school, and community settings. Prevention programs
are usually designed to reach specific populations
in their primary settings, such as reaching children
at school or through recreational or after-school
programs. However, in recent years it has become
more common to find programs for any given target
group in a variety of settings, such as holding a
family-based program in a school or a church. The
goal of these programs is to build new and strengthen
existing protective factors and reverse or reduce
modifiable risk factors in youth.
Prevention programs can be described by the audience
or intervention level for which they are designed:
• Universal programs are designed for the general
population, such as all students in a school.
• Selective programs target groups at risk, or subsets
of the general population such as children of drug
abusers or poor school achievers.
• Indicated programs are designed for people who
are already experimenting with drugs.
Tiered programs, such as the Adolescent Transitions
Program, incorporate all three levels of intervention.
Others, such as Early Risers “Skills for Success”
Prevention Program, may have only two levels
of intervention.
Details of the programs used as examples in the
following sections are provided in Chapter 4.
In the Family
Prevention programs can strengthen protective factors
among young children by teaching parents better
family communication skills, developmentally
appropriate discipline styles, firm and consistent rule
enforcement, and other family management skills.
Parents also can be taught how to increase their
emotional, social, cognitive, and material support,
which includes, for example, meeting their children’s
financial, transportation, health care, and homework
needs. Research confirms the benefit of parents taking
a more active role in their children’s lives, by talking
with them about drugs, monitoring their activities,
getting to know their friends, understanding their
problems and concerns, providing consistent rules
and discipline, and being involved in their learning
and education. The importance of the parent-child
relationship continues through adolescence and beyond.
An example of a universal family-based program is
the Strengthening Families Program For Parents and
Youth, 10–14, which provides rural parents guidance
on family management skills, communication,
National Institute on Drug Abuse
academic support, and parent-child relationships.
Recognizing that it can be difficult to attract
parents to this program, the researchers encourage
participation through flexibility in scheduling and
location. Offering conveniences such as babysitting,
transportation, and meals make participation more
practical for many rural parents, while enhancing
the program’s success in reaching its goals.
Another type of family program operates within a
school setting. The Adolescent Transitions Program,
for example, is a tiered intervention family program.
All families can get involved with the universal
intervention, which makes available a Family Resource
Room where information on parenting is provided.
The Family Check-Up, the selective level of this
program, is an assessment process to identify and
help families at greater risk by providing them with
information and interventions specific to their needs.
Families already engaged in problem behaviors and
identified as needing an indicated intervention are
provided more intense assistance and information
tailored to their problem. Such assistance might
include, for example, individual or family therapy,
intensive parent coaching, therapeutic foster care, or
other family-specific interventions. The uniqueness
of the tiered approach is that the whole school
participates in the program and all individuals or
families receive the appropriate level of help without
being labeled in the process.
In School
Prevention programs in schools focus on children’s
social and academic skills, including enhancing
peer relationships, self-control, coping skills, social
behaviors, and drug offer refusal skills. School-based
prevention programs should be integrated within
the school’s own goal of enhanced academic
performance. Evidence is emerging that a major risk
for school failure is a child’s inability to read by the
third and fourth grades (Barrera et al. 2002), and
school failure is strongly associated with drug abuse.
Integrated programs strengthen students’ bonding
to school and reduce their likelihood of dropping
out. Most prevention curricula include a normative
education component designed to correct the
misperception that many students are abusing drugs.
Principles for Programs
Family-based prevention programs should
enhance family bonding and relationships and include
parenting skills; practice in developing, discussing, and
enforcing family policies on substance abuse; and training
in drug education and information.
Prevention programs can be designed to
intervene as early as preschool to address risk factors
for drug abuse, such as aggressive behavior, poor social
skills, and academic difficulties.
Prevention programs for elementary school
children should target improving academic and social-
emotional learning to address risk factors for drug abuse,
such as early aggression, academic failure, and
school dropout.
Prevention programs for middle or junior
high and high school students should increase academic
and social competence.
Prevention programs aimed at general
populations at key transition points, such as the transition
to middle school, can produce beneficial effects even
among high-risk families and children. Such interventions
do not single out risk populations and, therefore, reduce
labeling and promote bonding to school and community.
Community prevention programs that
combine two or more effective programs, such as family-
based and school-based programs, can be more effective
than a single program alone.
Community prevention programs reaching
populations in multiple settings—for example, schools,
clubs, faith-based organizations, and the media—are most
effective when they present consistent, community-wide
messages in each setting.
Chapter 3 Principles
PRINCIPLE 5
PRINCIPLE 6
PRINCIPLE 7
PRINCIPLE 8
PRINCIPLE 9
PRINCIPLE 10
PRINCIPLE 11
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Chapter 3 Principles
Principles for Program Delivery
When communities adapt programs to
match their needs, community norms, or differing cultural
requirements, they should retain core elements of the
original research-based intervention.
Prevention programs should be long-term
with repeated interventions (i.e., booster programs) to
reinforce the original prevention goals. Research shows
that the benefits from middle school prevention programs
diminish without followup programs in high school.
Prevention programs should include
teacher training in good classroom management practices,
such as rewarding appropriate student behavior. Such
techniques help to foster student’s positive behavior,
achievement, academic motivation, and school bonding.
Prevention programs are most effective
when they employ interactive techniques, such as peer
discussion groups and parent role-playing, that allow
for active involvement in learning about drug abuse and
reinforcing skills.
Research-based prevention programs
can be cost-effective. Similar to earlier research, recent
research shows that for each dollar invested in prevention,
a savings of up to $10 in treatment for alcohol or other
substance abuse can be seen.
Most research-based prevention interventions in
schools include curricula that teach many of the
behavioral and social skills described above. The
Life Skills Training Program exemplifies universal
classroom programs that are provided to middle-
schoolers. The program teaches drug resistance,
self-management, and general social skills in a
3-year curriculum, with the third year a booster
session offered when students enter high school.
The Caring School Community Program is another
type of school-based intervention. This universal
elementary school program focuses on establishing
a “sense of community” among the classroom, school,
and family settings. The community support that
results helps children succeed in school and cope
with stress and other problems when they occur.
An indicated intervention that reaches high school
students, Project Towards No Drug Abuse focuses on
students who have failed to succeed in school and are
engaged in drug abuse and other problem behaviors.
The program seeks to rebuild students’ interest in
school and their future, correct their misperceptions
about drug abuse, and strengthen protective factors,
including positive decisionmaking and commitment.
Recent research suggests caution when
grouping high-risk teens in peer group
interventions for drug abuse prevention.
Such groups have been shown to produce
negative effects, as participants appear to
reinforce substance abuse behaviors over time
(Dishion et al. 2002). Research is examining
how to prevent such effects, with a particular
focus on the role of adults and positive peers.
In the Community
Prevention programs work at the community level
with civic, religious, law enforcement, and other
government organizations to enhance antidrug
norms and prosocial behaviors. Strategies to change
key aspects of the environment are often employed
at the community level. These can involve instituting
new policies, such as the drug-free school concept,
or strengthening community practices, such as asking
for proof of age to buy cigarettes.
PRINCIPLE 12
PRINCIPLE 13
PRINCIPLE 14
PRINCIPLE 15
PRINCIPLE 16
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Many programs coordinate prevention efforts
across settings to communicate consistent messages
through school, work, religious institutions, and the
media. Research has shown that programs that reach
youth through multiple sources can strongly impact
community norms (Chou et al. 1998). Community-
based programs also typically include development
of policies or enforcement of regulations, mass media
efforts, and community-wide awareness programs.
Examples include establishing youth curfew, having
advertising restrictions, reducing the density of alcohol
outlets in the community, raising cigarette prices,
and creating drug-free school zones. Some carefully
structured and targeted media interventions have
proven to be very effective in reducing drug abuse.
For example, a mass media campaign targeting
sensation-seeking youth reduced marijuana abuse
by 27 percent among high sensation-seeking youth
(Palmgreen et al. 2001).
Project STAR is an example of a multicomponent
drug abuse prevention program for the community.
This project tested whether a coordinated effort
that encompassed schools, parents, community
organizations, health policies, and the media could
make a difference in preventing drug abuse among
youth. Project STAR reached all children and
families in the community. The middle school
curriculum was the core of the program and was
reinforced by homework and other activities of the
parent component. Health policies and mass media
components were incorporated as well. Long-term
followup studies have shown significant impacts in
reducing substance abuse, with benefits lasting well
into participants’ adult years.
What are the core elements of effective
research-based prevention programs?
In recent years, many research-based prevention
programs have proven effective. These programs
were tested with rigorous designs in diverse
communities in a wide variety of settings, and with
a variety of populations. The most rigorous design
tests the program’s effects on a group that receives
the intervention (i.e., “experimental group”) and
compares results to a second group that did not
receive the intervention (i.e., “control group”).
As communities review prevention programs to
determine which best fit their needs, the following
core elements of effective research-based programs
should be considered.
• Structure—how each program is organized
and constructed;
• Content—how the information, skills, and
strategies are presented; and
• Delivery—how the program is selected or adapted
and implemented, as well as how it is evaluated
in a specific community.
When adapting programs to match community
characteristics, it is important to retain these core
elements to ensure that the most effective aspects of
the program remain intact. Core elements help build
effective research-based prevention programs.
Each core element contains descriptive features, which
are presented in the following sections. Tables are
included in each section to provide examples of
how these features fit together in programs.
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Content of Prevention Programs
Program Types
Community
School
Family
Information
Drug Trends
Drug Effects
Drug Abuse
Symptoms
Skills Development
Social Skills
Resistance Skills
Parenting Skills
Methods
Tolerence Policies
Norms Change
Home Drug-Testing;
Curfew
Services
Drug-Free Zones
School Counseling and
Assistance
Family Therapy
The setting describes where the program takes place.
Prevention programs are usually designed to reach
target populations in their primary setting, such as
reaching children at school. It is becoming more
common, however, for effective programs to be
conducted in settings other than their primary
setting—for example, holding a family-based
program in a school or a school-based program
in a youth organization such as Boys/Girls Clubs.
Multicomponent programs reach populations
in a variety of settings.
Content
Content is composed of information, skills
development, methods, and services. Information
can include facts about drugs and their effects, as
well as drug laws and policies. Drug information
alone, however, has not been found to be effective in
deterring drug abuse. Combining information with
skills, methods, and services produces more effective
results. Programs include skills development training
to build and improve behaviors in important areas,
such as communication within the family, social
and emotional development, academic and social
competence in children, and peer resistance
strategies in adolescents.
Methods are oriented toward structural change,
such as establishing and enforcing school rules on
substance abuse, or enforcing existing laws, such
as those on tobacco sales to minors. Services could
include school counseling and assistance, peer
counseling, family therapy, and health care. These
content areas are designed to reduce modifiable risk
factors and strengthen protective factors.
The table below describes the type of content
included in programs.
Structure
Structure addresses program type, audience, and
setting. Several program types have been shown
to be effective in preventing drug abuse. School-
based programs, the first to be fully developed
and tested, have become the primary approach
for reaching all children. Family-based programs
have proven effective in reaching both children
and their parents in a variety of settings. Media
and computer technology programs are beginning
to demonstrate effectiveness in reaching people at
the community level as well as the individual level.
Research also shows that combining two or
more effective programs, such as family and
school programs, can be even more effective
than a single program alone. These are called
multicomponent programs.
The following examples illustrate program structure:
Within these categories, programs have been designed
to specifically target the needs of a particular audience,
such as an indicated prevention program for high-
risk boys. Examples of other subcategories would
include urban or rural populations, racial and ethnic
minorities, and different age groups. Researchers are
testing how to modify effective programs to best
address such audience differences.
Structure of Prevention Programs
Program Type         Audience
Setting
Community
(Universal)
School
(Selective)
Family
(Indicated)
All Youth
Middle School
Students
High-RiskYouth
and Their Families
Billboards
After-School
Clinic
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Delivery
Delivery includes program selection or adaptation
and implementation. The following table describes
various delivery approaches.
During the selection process, communities match
effective research-based programs to their community
needs. In Chapter 2, it was suggested that communities
conduct a structured review of existing programs to
determine what gaps remain, given risk and protective
factors in the community and the community’s drug
problems and needs. This information can then be
incorporated into the community plan, which guides
the selection of new research-based programs.
For initial guidance to aid the selection process,
communities can refer to the description of programs
in several categories found in Chapter 4. Additional
planning and program resources can be found in
Selected Resources and References, which offers Web
sites, contact information, and publications to guide
community efforts.
Adaptation involves shaping a program to fit the
needs of a specific population in various settings.
Scientists have been exploring how best to culturally
adapt effective programs to a specific environment
(such as a rural environment) and population (only
boys, for example). In the process of adaptation, the
program’s core elements are maintained to ensure the
effectiveness of the intervention, while addressing the
community’s needs. Several research-based adapted
programs are now available, such as the Life Skills
Training Program for inner-city minority youth.
For programs that have not yet been adapted and
studied in a research protocol, it is best to implement
the program as designed to ensure the most effective
outcomes. Implementation refers to how the program
is delivered, including the number of sessions,
methods used, and program followup. Research
has found that how a program is implemented can
determine its effectiveness in preventing drug abuse.
Use of interactive methods and appropriate
booster sessions helps to reinforce earlier
program content and skills to maintain
program benefits.
Delivery of Prevention Programs
Program
Type
Community
School
Family
Program Selection
or Adaptation
Spanish-Speaking
Population
Gender
Rural
Implementation
Features
Consistent
Multimedia
Messages
Booster Sessions
Recruitment/
Retention
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
How can the community evaluate the
impact of its program on drug abuse?
Conducting evaluations of community prevention
programs can be challenging. Many community
leaders have consulted with university faculty members
and other local and State evaluation experts to assist
in designing and implementing evaluation procedures.
Ensuring appropriate evaluation design is important
because errors can result in findings that do not show
a clear relationship between the program and the
outcomes. Were the results truly attributable to the
program’s effects and not some other source, such
as other community events or the maturation
of the target groups?
An evaluation should identify what was accomplished
in the program, how it was carried out, and its effects.
To ensure a thorough evaluation, the program
implementer and staff should assess ongoing
adherence to program elements. Keeping records
of content delivered, session attendance, content
feedback quizzes, and independent observations
of implementation fidelity can help monitor the
effectiveness of program implementation and
provide key information on why a program
is or is not achieving its intended effects.
How can the community implement and
sustain effective prevention programs?
After considering risk and protective factors
within the community and selecting and adapting
prevention programs to address those risks, the
community must begin to implement those programs.
In many communities, coalitions formed during the
community planning process remain involved in
overseeing program implementation. They continue
to review progress toward goals and objectives set
out in the community plan. Responsibility for actual
implementation, however, generally resides within the
local public or private community-based organization
in the educational, social service, or other local system
implementing the programs.
To ensure effective implementation, research-based
school and family programs often require extensive
human and financial resources and a serious
commitment to training and technical assistance.
In addition to resources, special attention is needed
to attract and keep program participants interested
and involved in the programs. This is especially
important when involving families in rural and poverty
settings. Research has shown that extra effort in
providing incentives, maximal schedule flexibility,
minimal time demands, free meals, transportation,
baby-sitting, personal contact, and endorsement from
important community leaders all help to attract and
retain program participants. In short, how a program
is delivered to specific audiences is critical to its success.
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Parents can work with others in the community
to use the prevention principles in selecting drug
abuse programs.
Educators can incorporate research-based
content and delivery into their regular
classroom curricula.
Community Leaders can work with evaluation
experts to evaluate program progress and
develop improvements in outcomes.
COMMUNITY ACTION BOX
Evaluation pitfalls can be avoided by consulting with
experts who can guide the evaluation design by:
• using tested data-collection instruments;
• obtaining good baseline, or preintervention,
information;
• using control or comparison groups who did not
receive the intervention, but whose characteristics
are similar to those who did receive it;
• monitoring the quality of program implementation;
• ensuring that postintervention followup includes
a large percentage of the target population; and
• using appropriate statistical methods to analyze
the data.
In addition to assessing program impact, evaluation
is an ongoing process that can provide guidance on
maintaining the program’s responsiveness to changing
community needs.
The evaluation process needs to answer questions
about the program and its outcomes, including:
a What was accomplished in the program?
a How was the program carried out?
a Who participated in it?
a How much of the program was received
by participants?
a Is there a connection between the amount
of program received and outcomes?
a Was the program implemented as intended?
a Did the program achieve what was expected
in the short term?
a Did the program produce the desired
long-term effects?
What are the cost-benefits of
community prevention programs?
Research has demonstrated that preventing substance
abuse and other problem behaviors can have a
net benefit after accounting for costs. In a recent
study, Spoth and associates (2002a) performed
cost-effectiveness and benefit-cost analyses on data
from two long-term interventions already shown
to be effective in preventing substance abuse: Iowa
Strengthening Families Program (ISFP; now called
The Strengthening Families Program: For Parents
and Youth 10–14), and Preparing for the Drug-Free
Years (PDFY; now called Guiding Good Choices).
Both interventions were found to have net benefits
by preventing adult cases of alcohol abuse and thus
saving future costs for alcohol abuse treatment.
Benefit-to-cost ratios were $9.60 for each dollar
invested in prevention for the ISFP group, and $5.85
per dollar invested in prevention for the PDFY group.
For each family in the ISFP condition, there was a
benefit of $5,923; and the PDFY condition resulted
in a benefit of $2,697 per family. In addition, an
analysis of the Skills, Opportunity, And Recognition
(SOAR) program had a benefit-to-cost ratio of $4.25
for every dollar spent (Hawkins et al. 1999; Aos et
al. 2001). An earlier study (Pentz 1998) found that
for every dollar spent on drug abuse prevention,
communities could save from $4 to $5 in costs
for drug abuse treatment and counseling.
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Universal Programs
Elementary School
Caring School Community Program (Formerly, Child
Development Project) (Battistich et al. 1997; U.S.
Department of Education 2001). This is a universal
family-plus-school program to reduce risk and bolster
protective factors among elementary school children.
The program focuses on strengthening students’
“sense of community,” or connection, to school.
Research has shown that this sense of community
has been pivotal to reducing drug use, violence,
and mental health problems, while promoting
academic motivation and achievement. The program
consists of a set of mutually reinforcing classroom,
school, and family involvement approaches. These
promote positive peer, teacher-student, and home-
school relationships and the development of social,
emotional, and character-related skills. The program
provides detailed instructional and implementation
materials and accompanying staff development.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Eric Schaps, Ph.D.
Caring School Community Program
Developmental Studies Center
2000 Embarcadero, Suite 305
Oakland, CA 94606-5300
Phone: 510-533-0213
Fax: 510-464-3670
E-mail: Eric_Schaps@devstu.org
Web site: www.devstu.org
Chapter 4: Examples of Research-Based
Drug Abuse Prevention Programs
To help those working in drug abuse prevention,
NIDA, in cooperation with prevention scientists,
presents the following examples of research-based
programs that use a variety of strategies proven
effective in preventing drug abuse. Each program
was developed as part of a research protocol in which
an intervention group and a comparison group were
matched on important characteristics, such as age,
grade in school, parents’ level of education, family
income, community size, and risk and protective
factors. The interventions were tested in a family,
school, or community setting, all with positive results.
Prevention research continues to identify effective
programs and strategies, thus this list is not meant
to be exhaustive.
Many of these research-based programs include
approaches to identifying early risk factors and
addressing them long before a child encounters
substance abuse. Whether the intervention focuses on
improving teachers’ skills in classroom management
and academic support or on parents’ communication
skills, early positive support can reduce risks and
increase protection. Also, recent research is focused
on adapting interventions to address specific risks by
gender, ethnic or racial identification, and geographic
settings to improve the effectiveness of programs for
specific audiences.
The programs are presented within their audience
category (universal, selective, indicated, or tiered)
and for whom they are designed (elementary, middle,
or high school students). Since these programs are
only examples, community planners may wish to
explore additional programs and planning resources,
which are highlighted in Selected Resources and
References. With NIDA’s continued support of
research on effective prevention strategies at all levels
of prevention, new research-based programs will
continue to be made available in the future.
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Classroom-Centered (CC) and Family-School
Partnership (FSP) Intervention (Ialongo et al. 2001).
The CC and FSP interventions are multicomponent,
universal first-grade interventions to reduce later onset
of violence and aggressive behavior and to improve
academic performance. The CC intervention combines
two effective classroom programs, the “Good Behavior
Game” and “Mastery Learning,” and includes
classroom management and organizational strategies,
as well as reading and mathematics curricula. The
CC intervention also focuses on enhancing teachers’
behavior management and instructional skills. The
FSP intervention targets the same risk factors of
aggression and learning problems, but directly
involves parents. It seeks to improve parent-teacher
communication, parental teaching, and children’s
behavior management strategies in the home.
Findings show that sixth-graders exposed to the
CC intervention in first grade had significantly
reduced their aggressive behavior, as compared
with control students.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Nicholas Ialongo, Ph.D.
Department of Mental Health
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health
Johns Hopkins University
624 N. Broadway
Baltimore, MD 21205
Phone: 410-550-3441
Fax: 410-550-3461
E-mail: nialongo@jhsph.edu
Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies
(PATHS) (Greenberg and Kusché 1998). PATHS is
a comprehensive program for promoting emotional
health and social competencies and reducing aggression
and behavior problems in elementary school children,
while enhancing the educational process in the
classroom. This K–5 curriculum is designed for use
by educators and counselors in a multiyear, universal
prevention model. Although primarily for use in
school and classrooms, information and activities
are also included for use with parents. PATHS has
been shown to improve protective factors and
reduce behavioral risk factors that impact youth
problem behaviors. Studies report reduced aggressive
behaviors, increased self-control, and an improved
ability to tolerate frustration and use conflict-
resolution strategies.
Contact for Materials:
Channing Bete Company
One Community Place
South Deerfield, MA 01373-0200
Phone: 877-896-8532
Fax: 800-499-6464
E-mail: PrevSci@channing-bete.com
Web site: www.channing-bete.com
Contact for Research:
Mark T. Greenberg, Ph.D.
Prevention Research Center
Pennsylvania State University
110 Henderson Building-South
University Park, PA 16802-6504
Phone: 814-863-0112
Fax: 814-865-2530
E-mail: mxg47@psu.edu
Web site: www.prevention.psu.edu/PATHS
Contact for Training:
PATHS Training, LLC
Carol A. Kusché, Ph.D.
927 10th Avenue E.
Seattle, WA 98102
Phone and Fax: 206-323-6688
E-mail: ckusche@attglobal.ne
Skills, Opportunity, And Recognition (SOAR)
(Formerly, Seattle Social Development Program)
(Lonczak et al. 2002; U.S. Department of Education
2001; Hawkins et al. 1999). This universal school-
based intervention for grades one through six seeks
to reduce childhood risks for delinquency and
drug abuse by enhancing protective factors. The
multicomponent intervention combines training
for teachers, parents, and children during the
elementary grades to promote children’s bonding
to school, positive school behavior, and academic
achievement. These strategies are designed to enhance
opportunities, skills, and rewards for children’s
prosocial involvement in school and their families.
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Long-term followup results show positive outcomes
for participants, including reduced antisocial behavior,
misbehavior, alienation and teen pregnancy, and
improved academic skills, commitment to school,
and positive relationships with people.
Contact for Materials:
Channing Bete Company
One Community Place
South Deerfield, MA 01373-0200
Phone: 877-896-8532
Fax: 800-499-6464
E-mail: PrevSci@channing-bete.com
Web site: www.channing-bete.com
Contact for Research:
J. David Hawkins, Ph.D.
Social Development Research Group
University of Washington
9725 Third Avenue NE, Suite 401
Seattle, WA 98115
Phone: 206-543-7655
Fax: 206-543-4507
E-mail: jdh@u.washington.edu
Web site: www.depts.washington.edu/sdrg
Middle School
Guiding Good Choices (GGC) (Formerly, Preparing
for the Drug-Free Years) (Hawkins et al. 1999;
Kosterman et al. 1997; U.S. Department of Education
2001; Spoth et al. 2002b). This curriculum was first
researched as part of the Seattle Social Development
Project at the University of Washington to educate
parents on how to reduce risk factors and strengthen
bonding in their families. In five 2-hour sessions,
parents are shown how to (1) create age-appropriate
opportunities for family involvement and interaction;
(2) set clear expectations, monitor children, and apply
discipline; (3) teach their children peer coping strategies;
(4) adopt family conflict management approaches;
and (5) express positive feelings to enhance family
bonding. Dr. Richard Spoth of Iowa State University
independently tested this intervention for rural
parents and found the program to be effective in
inhibiting alcohol and marijuana use. Special efforts
were made to ensure recruitment and retention
of study participants.
Contact for Research:
J. David Hawkins, Ph.D.
Social Development Research Group
University of Washington
9725 Third Avenue NE, Suite 401
Seattle, WA 98115
Phone: 206-543-7655
Fax: 206-543-4507
E-mail: jdh@u.washington.edu
Web site: www.depts.washington.edu/sdrg
Contact for Materials:
Channing Bete Company
One Community Place
South Deerfield, MA 01373-0200
Phone: 877-896-8532
Fax: 800-499-6464
E-mail: PrevSci@channing-bete.com
Web site: www.channing-bete.com
Life Skills Training (LST) Program (Botvin et al.
1995, 1997, 2003; U.S. Department of Education
2001). LST is designed to address a wide range of risk
and protective factors by teaching general personal
and social skills, along with drug resistance skills
and normative education. This universal program
consists of a 3-year prevention curriculum for students
in middle or junior high school. LST contains 15
sessions during the first year, 10 booster sessions
during the second, and 5 sessions during the third
year. The program can be taught either in grades 6, 7,
and 8 (for middle school) or grades 7, 8, and 9 (for
junior high schools). LST covers three major content
areas: (1) drug resistance skills and information,
(2) self-management skills, and (3) general social
skills. The program has been extensively tested over
the past 20 years and found to reduce the prevalence
of tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drug use relative to
controls by 50 to 87 percent. When combined with
booster sessions, LST was shown to reduce the
prevalence of substance abuse long term by as much
as 66 percent, with benefits still in place beyond
the high school years. Although LST was originally
tested predominantly with White youth, several studies
have shown that the LST program is also effective
National Institute on Drug Abuse
with inner-city minority youth. Moreover, an
age-appropriate version of the LST program for upper
elementary school students was recently developed
and shown to reduce tobacco and alcohol use (Botvin
et al. 2003). It contains 24 classes (8 classes per year)
to be taught during either grades 3 to 5 or 4 to 6.
Contact for Materials and Training:
National Health Promotion Associates, Inc.
Life Skills Training
711 Westchester Avenue
White Plains, NY 10604
Phone: 914-421-2525
Fax: 914-683-6998
E-mail: LSTinfo@nhpanet.com
Web site: www.lifeskillstraining.com
Contact for Research:
Gilbert Botvin, Ph.D.
Institute for Prevention Research
Weill Medical College of Cornell University
411 East 69th Street, Room 203
New York, NY 10021
Phone: 212-746-1270
Fax: 212-746-8390
E-mail: gjbotvin@.med.cornell.edu
Lions-Quest Skills for Adolescence (SFA) (Eisen et al.
2002; U.S. Department of Education 2001). SFA is a
commercially available, universal, life skills education
program in use in schools nationwide. A rigorous
school-based trial of SFA funded by a NIDA research
grant compared the effectiveness of SFA delivered
in sixth grade with “standard” drug prevention
programs in preventing or delaying the onset of
students’ tobacco, alcohol, and illegal substance use
through middle school. The 40-session version of SFA
tested includes social influence and social cognitive
approaches to teaching cognitive-behavioral skills
for building self-esteem and personal responsibility,
communicating effectively, making better decisions,
resisting social influences and asserting rights, and
increasing drug use knowledge and consequences
(Quest International, 3rd edition 1992.) Some of
the results after 1 year indicate that exposure to the
program can help deter initiation of regular cigarette
smoking and marijuana use; these results held across
all racial/ethnic groups studied. Additional findings
after 2 years indicate lower initiation and regular
marijuana use across all groups, as well as lower
binge drinking rates among Hispanic students.
Contact for Materials:
Greg Long
Lions-Quest
1984-B Coffman Road
Newark, OH 43055
Phone: 740-522-6405 or 800-446-2700
Fax: 740-522-6580
E-mail: info@lions-quest.org
Web site: www.lions-quest.org
Contact for Research:
Marvin Eisen, Ph.D.
Population Studies Center
The Urban Institute
2100 M Street, NW
Washington, DC 20037
Phone: 202-261-5858
Fax: 202-452-1840
E-mail: meisen@ui.urban.org
Project ALERT (U.S. Department of Education 2001).
This drug prevention curriculum is a 2-year, universal
program for middle school students that reduces the
onset and regular use of substances among youth.
The 14-lesson program is designed to prevent drug
use initiation and the transition to regular use. It
focuses on substances that adolescents typically use
first and most widely—alcohol, tobacco, marijuana,
and inhalants. Project ALERT uses participatory
activities and videos to help students establish nondrug
norms, develop reasons not to use, and resist prodrug
pressures. The program has prevented marijuana use
initiation, decreased current and heavy smoking, curbed
alcohol misuse, reduced prodrug attitudes and beliefs,
and helped smokers quit. The program has proven
successful with high- and low-risk youth from
a variety of communities.
Contact for Materials:
G. Bridget Ryan
Project ALERT
725 S. Figueroa Street, Suite 970
Los Angeles, CA 90017
Phone: 800-253-7810
Fax: 213-623-0585
E-mail: info@projectalert.best.org
Web site: www.projectalert.best.org
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Contact for Research:
Phyllis L. Ellickson, Ph.D.
Director, Center for Research on
Maternal, Child, and Adolescent Health
The RAND Corporation
1700 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
Phone: 310-393-0411
Fax: 310-451-7062
E-mail: Phyllis_ellickson@rand.org
Web site: www.rand.org
Project STAR (Chou et al. 1998; U.S. Department of
Education 2001). Project STAR is a comprehensive
drug abuse prevention community program with
components for schools, parents, community
organizations, and health policymakers. An additional
component targets mass media to encourage publicizing
positive efforts for drug prevention. The middle
school component is a social influence curriculum
that is incorporated into classroom instruction by
trained teachers over a 2-year timetable. In the
parent program, parents work with children on
homework, learn family communication skills, and
get involved in community action. Strategies range
from individual-level change, such as teaching youth
drug resistance skills, to school and community-change,
including limiting youth access to alcohol or drugs.
Long-term followup studies showed significant
reductions in drug use among participants, when
compared with adolescents in the community who
had not received prevention intervention.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Karen Bernstein, M.P.H.
University of Southern California
Institute for Prevention Research
1000 S. Fremont Avenue, Unit #8
Alhambra, CA 91803
Phone: 626-457-6687
Fax: 626-457-6695
E-mail: Karenber@usc.edu
The Strengthening Families Program: For Parents
and Youth 10–14 (SFP 10–4) (Formerly, the Iowa
Strengthening Families Program) (Spoth, Redmond,
and Shin 2000, 2001). This program offers seven
sessions, each attended by youth and their parents.
Program implementation and evaluation have been
conducted through partnerships that include state
university researchers, Cooperative Extension System
staff, local schools, and community implementers.
Longitudinal study of comparisons with control
group families showed positive effects on parents’
child management practices (for example, setting
standards, monitoring children, and applying
consistent discipline) and on parent-child affective
quality. In addition, a recent evaluation found
delayed initiation of substance use at the 6-year
followup. Other findings showed improved youth
resistance to peer pressure to use alcohol, reduced
affiliation with antisocial peers, and reduced levels of
problem behaviors. Importantly, conservative benefit-
cost calculations indicate returns of $9.60 per dollar
invested in SFP.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Virginia Molgaard, Ph.D.
Prevention Program Development
The Strengthening Families Program:
For Parents and Youth 10–14
Institute for Social and Behavioral Research
Iowa State University
2625 North Loop Drive, Suite 500
Ames, IA 50010-8296
Phone: 515-294-8762
Fax: 515-294-3613
E-mail: vmolgaar@iastate.edu
Web site: www.extension.iastate.edu/sfp/
Contact for Research and Evaluation Information:
Richard Spoth, Ph.D.
c/o Pandora Lamar
Institute for Social and Behavioral Research
Iowa State University
2625 North Loop Drive, Suite 500
Ames, IA 50010-8296
Phone: 515-294-5383
Fax: 515-294-3613
E-mail: rlspoth@iastate.edu; cc: plamar@iastate.edu
Web site: www.projectfamily.isbr.iastate.edu
National Institute on Drug Abuse
High School
Life Skills Training: Booster Program. The 3-year
LST universal classroom program contains 15 booster
sessions during the first year, 10 during the second,
and 5 during the third year. See the Life Skills
Training description above for background and
contact information.
Lions-Quest Skills for Adolescence. (Eisen 2002; U.S.
Department of Education 2001). See description
above for background and contact information.
Project ALERT Plus. An enhanced version of Project
ALERT has been added as a high school component
and is being tested in 45 rural communities. See the
Project ALERT description above for background
and contact information.
The Strengthening Families Program: For Parents
and Youth 10–14. (Formerly, the Iowa Strengthening
Families Program). See description above for
background and contact information.
Selective Programs
Elementary School
Focus on Families (FOF) (Catalano et al. 1999,
2002). A selective program for parents receiving
methadone treatment and their children, FOF seeks
to reduce parents’ use of illegal drugs by teaching
them skills for relapse prevention and coping. Parents
are also taught how to better manage their families
to reduce their children’s risk for future drug abuse.
The parent training consists of a 5-hour family
retreat and 32 parent training sessions of 1.5 hours
each. Children attend 12 of the sessions to practice
developmentally appropriate skills with their parents.
Results from an experimental evaluation of FOF
found positive program effects on parents at the 1-year
followup, especially in parenting skills, rule-setting,
domestic conflict, drug refusal skills, and drug use.
At the 1-year assessment, significantly fewer children
in the experimental condition reported having stolen
something in the previous 6 months. After 2 years
of family skills training, positive effects were still
evident in parents’ drug refusal skills, and positive
effects had emerged in parent problemsolving skills
in general situations. No statistically significant
differences in drug use were found between those in
experimental versus control conditions, although the
direction of difference still favored experimental par-
ticipants. Importantly, the strength of program effects
on children was substantially stronger at the 2-year
followup. Note that the direction of differences on
all primary child outcome measures were stronger
at the second-year assessment than at the end of the
first year. These findings suggest that interventions to
prevent relapse among parents and substance abuse
among their children may produce immediate, as well
as delayed, or “sleeper” effects on targeted risk and
protective factors and substance use. The promise of
the FOF program is evident in the early reduction
in family-related risk factors—particularly for very
high-risk families—with an overall trend toward
positive program effects on child outcomes.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Richard F. Catalano, Ph.D.
Social Development Research Group
9725 Third Avenue, NE, Suite 401
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98115
Phone: 206-543-6382
Fax: 206-543-4507
E-mail: catalano@u.washington.edu
Web site: depts.washington.edu/sdrg
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
The Strengthening Families Program (SFP) (Kumpfer
et al. 1996, 2002). SFP, a universal and selective
multicomponent, family-focused prevention program,
provides support for families with 6- to 11-year-olds.
The program began as an effort to help drug-abusing
parents improve their parenting skills and reduce
their children’s risk for subsequent problems.
It has shown success in elementary schools and
communities. Strengthening Families has three
components: a behavioral parent training program,
children’s skills training program, and family skills
training program. In each of the 14 weekly sessions,
parents and children are trained separately in the first
hour. During the second hour, parents and children
come together in the family skills training portion.
The session begins with families sharing dinner.
Barriers to attendance are reduced by providing
child care, transportation, and small incentives. This
approach has been evaluated in a variety of settings
and with several racial and ethnic groups. Spanish-
language manuals are available. Primary outcomes
include reduced family conflict, youth conduct
disorders, aggressiveness, and substance abuse, as
well as improved youth social skills, parenting skills,
and family communication and organization.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Karol Kumpfer, Ph.D.
University of Utah
Department of Health Promotion
300 S. 1850 E. Room 215
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-0920
Phone: 801-581-7718
Fax: 801-581-5872
E-mail: karol.kumpfer@health.utah.edu
Web site: www.strengtheningfamiliesprogram.org
Contact for Training:
Henry O. Whiteside, Ph.D.
Lutragroup
5215 Pioneer Fork Road
Salt Lake City, UT 84108-1678
Phone: 801-583-4601
Fax: 801-583-7979
E-mail: hwhiteside@lutragroup.com
Middle School
Coping Power (Lochman and Wells 2002). Coping
Power is a multicomponent child and parent preventive
intervention directed at preadolescent children at
high risk for aggressiveness and later drug abuse
and delinquency. The child component is derived
from an anger coping program, primarily tested
with highly aggressive boys and shown to reduce
substance use. The Coping Power Child Component
is a 16-month program for fifth- and sixth-graders.
Group sessions usually occur before or after school
or during nonacademic periods. Training focuses
on teaching children how to identify and cope with
anxiety and anger; controlling impulsiveness; and
developing social, academic, and problemsolving
skills at school and home. Parents are also provided
training throughout the program. Results indicate
that the intervention produced relatively lower rates
of substance use at postintervention than seen among
the controls. Also, children of families receiving
the Coping Power child and parent components
significantly reduced aggressive behavior, as rated
by parents and teachers.
Contact for Materials and Research:
John E. Lochman, Ph.D.
Department of Psychology
University of Alabama
P.O. Box 870348
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487
Phone: 205-348-7678
Fax: 205-348-8648
E-mail: jlochman@gp.as.ua.edu
National Institute on Drug Abuse
High School
Adolescents Training and Learning to Avoid Steroids
(ATLAS) (Goldberg et al. 2000). ATLAS is a
multicomponent selective program for male high
school athletes, designed to reduce risk factors for
use of anabolic steroids and other drugs, while
providing healthy sports nutrition and strength-training
alternatives to illicit use of athletic-enhancing
substances. Coaches and peer teammates facilitate
curriculum delivery with scripted manuals in small
cooperative learning groups, taking advantage of an
influential coaching staff and the team atmosphere
where peers share common goals. Seven 45-minute
classroom sessions and seven physical training periods
involve role-playing, student-created campaigns,
and educational games. Instructional aids include
pocket-sized food and exercise guides and easy-to-
follow student workbooks. Parents are involved
through parent-student homework and are given
the booklet, Family Guide to Sports Nutrition.
Attitudes and alcohol and illicit drug use, as well as
nutrition behaviors and exercise self-efficacy, remained
significantly healthier among ATLAS program
participants at a 1-year followup.
Contact for Materials:
Division of Health Promotion
and Sports Medicine
Oregon Health & Science University
Phone: 503-494-7900
Web site: www.ohsu.edu/som-hpsm/atlas.html
Contact for Research:
Linn Goldberg, M.D., FACSM
Division of Health Promotion
and Sports Medicine
Oregon Health & Science University
3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road
Portland, OR 97201-3098
Phone: 503-494-8051
Fax: 503-494-1310
E-mail: goldberl@ohsu.edu
Web site: www.atlasprogram.com
Indicated Programs
High School
Project Towards No Drug Abuse (Project TND)
(Sussman et al. 2002). This indicated prevention
intervention targets high school age youth who
attend alternative or traditional high schools. The
goal is to prevent the transition from drug use to
drug abuse, considering the developmental issues
faced by older teens, particularly those at risk for
drug abuse. At the core of Project TND is a set of
12 in-class sessions that provide motivation and
cognitive misperception correction, social and self-
control skills, and decisionmaking material targeting
the use of cigarettes, alcohol, marijuana, and hard
drugs and violence-related behavior, such as carrying
a weapon. The classroom program has been found
to be effective at 1-year followup across three true
experimental field trials. The 12-session version is
effective across outcome variables, and many effects
are maintained at 2-year followup.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Steve Sussman, Ph.D., FAAHB
Institute for Health Promotion
and Disease Prevention Research
Departments of Preventive Medicine
and Psychology
University of Southern California
1000 S. Fremont Avenue, Unit 8
Building A-4, Room 4124
Alhambra, CA  91803
Phone: 626-457-6635
Fax: 626-457-4012
E-mail: ssussma@hsc.usc.edu
Reconnecting Youth Program (RY) (Eggert et al.
1995, 2001; Thompson et al. 1997). RY is a school-
based indicated prevention program for high school
students with poor school achievement and potential
for dropping out. Participants may also show signs
of multiple problem behaviors, such as substance
abuse, depression, aggression, or suicidal behaviors.
Students are screened for eligibility and then invited
to participate in the program. The program goals are
to increase school performance, reduce drug use, and
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
learn skills to manage mood and emotions. RY blends
small group work (10–12 students per class) to foster
positive peer bonding, with social skills training in
a daily, semester-long class. RY skills, taught by an
RY specially trained teacher or group leader, include
self-esteem enhancement, decisionmaking, personal
control, and interpersonal communication. Early
experiments have shown that participation in RY
improved school performance (20-percent increase
in GPA), decreased school dropout, reduced hard
drug use (by 60 percent), and decreased drug use
control problems, such as adverse consequences and
progression to heavier drug use. Recent studies of a
refined RY program model (with skills training on
depression and anger management and increased
monitoring of drug use) have found greater decreases
in hard drug use, depression, perceived stress, and
anger control problems.
Contact for Materials:
Reconnecting Youth: A Peer Group Approach
to Building Life Skills (Revised Edition)
National Educational Service
304 West Kirkwood Avenue, Suite 2
Bloomington, IN 47404
Phone: 800-733-6786 or 812-336-7790
Fax: 812-336-7790
E-mail: nes@nesonline.com
Web site: www.nesonline.com
Contact for Research and Program Evaluation:
Jerald R. Herting, Ph.D.
Reconnecting Youth Prevention
Research Program
Psychosocial and Community Health
University of Washington School of Nursing
9709 Third Avenue NE, Suite 510
Seattle, WA 98115
Phone: 206-543-3810 or 206-616-6478
Fax: 206-221-3674
E-mail: herting@u.washington.edu
Web site: www.son.washington.edu/department/pch/ry
Contact for Training:
Leona L. Eggert or Liela J. Nicholas,
Program Developers
Reconnecting Youth Prevention Programs
Phone: 425-861-1177
Fax: 425-861-8071
E-mail: RYprog@verizon.net
Tiered Programs
Elementary School
Early Risers “Skills for Success” Risk Prevention
Program (August et al. 2001; August et al. 2002;
August et al., in press). Early Risers is a selective,
multicomponent, preventive intervention for children
at heightened risk for early onset of serious conduct
problems, including licit and illicit drug use. The
program’s focus is on elementary school children
with early aggressive behavior. It is designed to deflect
children from the “early starter” developmental
pathway toward normal development by effecting
positive change in academic competence, behavioral
self-regulation, social competence, and parent
investment in the child. Early Risers has two
broad components: CORE, a set of child-focused
intervention components delivered continuously
in school and over the summer for 2 or 3 years,
implemented in tandem with FLEX, a family
support and empowerment component tailored to
meet family-specific needs and delivery through
home visits. Recent findings reveal that program
participants showed greater gains in social skills, peer
reputation, prosocial friendship selection, academic
achievement, and parent discipline than did controls.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Gerald J. August, Ph.D.
Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
University of Minnesota Medical School
P256/2B West, 2450 Riverside Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55454-1495
Phone: 612-273-9711
Fax: 612-273-9779
E-mail: augus001@tc.umn.edu
Fast Track Prevention Trial for Conduct Problems
(Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group 2002c).
Fast Track is a comprehensive preventive intervention
for young children at high risk for long-term antisocial
behavior. Based on a developmental model, the
intervention includes a universal classroom program
(adapted from the PATHS curriculum) for high-risk
children selected in kindergarten; it also includes
training for parents. Children receive social skills
training, academic tutoring, and home visits to improve
National Institute on Drug Abuse
academic and social competencies and reduce
problems. In first grade, the classroom intervention
builds skills in (1) emotional understanding and
communication, (2) friendship, (3) self-control, and
(4) social problemsolving. The selective intervention
reaches parents and children at higher risk for
conduct problems. Parenting strategies provide
skills to support school adjustment, improve the
child’s behavior, build parents’ self-control, promote
appropriate expectations for the child’s behavior, and
improve parent-child interaction. By the end of third
grade, 37 percent of the intervention group were free of
serious conduct problems, compared with 27 percent
of the control group.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Conduct Problems Prevention
Research Group
Karen L. Bierman, Ph.D.
Pennsylvania State University
Prevention Research Center
110 Henderson-Building South
University Park, PA 16802-6504
Phone: 814-865-3879
Fax: 814-865-3246
E-mail: prevention@psu.edu
Middle School
Adolescent Transitions Program (ATP) (Dishion et al.
2002). ATP is a school-based program that uses a
tiered approach to provide prevention services to
students in middle and junior high school and their
parents. The universal intervention level, directed
to parents of all students in a school, establishes a
Family Resource Room to engage parents, establish
norms for parenting practices, and disseminate
information about risks for problem behavior and
substance use. The selective intervention level, the
Family Check-Up, offers family assessment and
professional support to identify families at risk for
problem behavior and substance use. The indicated
level, the Parent Focus curriculum, provides direct
professional support to parents to make the changes
indicated by the Family Check-Up. Services may
include behavioral family therapy, parenting groups,
or case management services.
Contact for Materials and Research:
Thomas J. Dishion, Ph.D.
University of Oregon
Child and Family Center
195 West 12th Avenue
Eugene, OR 97401
Phone: 541-346-4805
Fax: 541-346-4858
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Chapter 5: Selected Resources and References
Below are resources relevant to drug abuse prevention. Information on NIDA’s Web site is followed by Web sites for
other Federal agencies and private organizations. These resources and the selected references that follow are excellent
sources of information in helping communities plan and implement research-based drug prevention programs.
Selected Resources
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS)
NIDA’s Web site (www.drugabuse.gov) provides
factual information on all aspects of drug abuse,
particularly the effects of drugs on the brain and
body, the prevention of drug abuse among children
and adolescents, the latest research on treatment
for addiction, and statistics on the extent of drug
abuse in the United States. The Web site allows
visitors to print or order publications, public service
announcements and posters, science education
curricula, research reports and fact sheets on specific
drugs or classes of drugs, and the NIDA NOTES
newsletter. The site also links to related Web sites
in the public and private sector.
Other Federal Resources
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP)
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA), DHHS
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockwall 2, 9th Floor, Suite 900
Rockville, MD 20857
Phone: 301-443-9110
www.prevention.samhsa.gov
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), DHHS
1600 Clifton Road
Atlanta, GA 30333
Phone: 404-639-3534
Phone: 800-311-3435 (toll-free)
www.cdc.gov
Safe and Drug-Free Schools Program
U.S. Department of Education (DoE)
400 Maryland Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20202
Phone: 800-872-5327 (toll-free)
www.ed.gov
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ)
2401 Jefferson Davis Highway
Alexandria, VA 22301
Phone: 202-307-1000
www.dea.gov
Knowledge Exchange Network, SAMHSA, DHHS
P.O. Box 42490
Washington, DC 20015
Phone: 800-789-2647 (toll-free)
www.mentalhealth.org
National Institute on Drug Abuse
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and
Drug Information (NCADI), SAMHSA, DHHS
Phone: 800-729-6686 (toll-free)
www.ncadi.samhsa.gov
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA), NIH, DHHS
6000 Executive Boulevard, Willco Building
Bethesda, MD 20892
Phone: 301-443-3860
www.niaaa.nih.gov
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), NIH, DHHS
6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 8184, MSC 9663
Bethesda, MD 20892
Phone: 301-443-4513
www.nimh.nih.gov
National Institutes of Health (NIH), DHHS
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20892
Phone: 301-496-4000
www.nih.gov
National Library of Medicine (NLM), NIH, DHHS
8600 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20894
Phone: 301-594-5983
Phone: 888-346-3656 (toll-free)
www.nlm.nih.gov
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention
(OJJDP), DOJ
810 Seventh Street
Washington, DC 20531
Phone: 202-307-5911
www.ojjdp.ncjrs.org/pubs/substance.html
Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)
P.O. Box 6000
Rockville, MD  20849
Phone: 800-666-3332 (toll-free)
www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA), DHHS
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
Phone: 301-443-8956
www.samhsa.gov
Other Selected Resources
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
(AACAP)
3615 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20016
Phone: 202-966-7300
www.aacap.org
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP): KidsHealth
11400 Tomahawk Creek Parkway
Leawood, KS 66211
www.familydoctor.org
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
141 Northwest Point Boulevard
Elk Grove, IL 60007-1098
Phone: 847-434-4000
www.aap.org
American Psychological Association (APA)
750 First Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
Phone: 800-374-2121 (toll-free)
Phone: 202-336-5510
www.apa.org
American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM)
4601 North Park Avenue, Arcade Suite 101
Chevy Chase, MD 20815
Phone: 301-656-3920
www.asam.org
Blueprints for Violence Prevention, Center for the Study
and Prevention of Violence
Institute on Behavioral Science
University of Colorado at Boulder
900 28th Street, Suite 107
439 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309
Phone: 303-492-1032
www.colorado.edu/cspv/blueprints/
Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse (CASA)
at Columbia University
633 Third Avenue, 19th Floor
New York, NY 10017
Phone: 212-841-5200
www.casacolumbia.org
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of America (CADCA)
901 North Pitt Street, Suite 300
Alexandria, VA 22314
Phone: 800-542-2322 (toll-free)
www.cadca.org
Drug Strategies, Inc.
1150 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: 202-289-9070
www.drugstrategies.org
Join Together
One Appleton Street, 4th Floor
Boston, MA 02116
Phone: 617-437-1500
www.jointogether.org
Latino Behavioral Health Institute
P.O. Box 1008
Thousand Oaks, CA 91360
Phone: 213-738-2882
www.lbhi.org
National Asian Pacific American Families Against
Substance Abuse (NAPAFASA)
340 East Second Street, Suite 409
Los Angeles, CA 90012
Phone: 213-625-5795
www.napafasa.org
National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS)
P.O. Box 6000
Rockville, MD 20849
Phone: 800-851-3420 (toll-free)
Phone: 301-519-5500
www.ncjrs.org
National Families in Action (NFIA)
2957 Clairmont Road, NE, Suite 150
Atlanta, GA 30329
Phone: 404-248-9676
www.nationalfamilies.org
National Hispanic Science Network (NHSN)
Center for Family Studies
Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences
University of Miami School of Medicine
1425 NW 10th Avenue, 3rd Floor
Miami, FL 33136-1024
Phone: 305-243-2340
www.hispanicscience.org
National Prevention Network (NPN)
808 17th Street, NW, Suite 410
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: 202-293-0090
www.nasadad.org/Departments/Prevention/prevhme1.htm
Partnership for a Drug-Free America
405 Lexington Avenue, Suite 1601
New York, NY 10174
Phone: 212-922-1560
www.drugfreeamerica.org
Society for Prevention Research (SPR)
1300 I Street, NW, Suite 250 West
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: 202-216-9670
www.preventionresearch.org
Selected References
The following references have been selected as
either summaries of the literature of the past several
years or as the latest findings on specific aspects of
prevention research, which have been cited in this
publication. For a more comprehensive list of research
citations, please consult the NIDA Web site at
www.drugabuse.gov.
Aos, S.; Phipps, P.; Barnoski, R.; and Lieb, R. The Comparative
Costs and Benefits of Programs to Reduce Crime. Vol. 4 (1-05-1201).
Olympia, WA: Washington State Institute for Public Policy,
May 2001.
Ashery, R.S.; Robertson, E.B.; and Kumpfer K.L.; eds. Drug
Abuse Prevention Through Family Interventions. NIDA Research
Monograph No. 177. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1998.
August, G.J.; Realmuto, G.M.; Hektner, J.M.; and Bloomquist, M.L.
An integrated components preventive intervention for aggressive
elementary school children: The Early Risers Program. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 69(4):614–626, 2001.
August, G.J.; Hektner, J.M.; Egan, E.A.; Realmuto, G.M.; and
Bloomquist, M.L. The Early Risers longitudinal trial: Examination
of 3-year outcomes in aggressive children with intent-to-treat
and as-intended analyses. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors
16(43):827–839, 2002.
August, G.J.; Lee, S.S.; Bloomquist, M.L.; Realmuto, G.M.; and
Hektner, J.M. Dissemination of an evidence-based prevention
innovation for aggressive children living in a culturally diverse,
urban neighborhood: The Early Risers effectiveness study.
Prevention Science, in press.
National Institute on Drug Abuse
Barrera, M.; Biglan, A.; Taylor, T.K.; Gunn, B.K.; Smolkowski, K.;
Black, C.; Ary, D.V.; and Fowler, R.C. Early elementary school
intervention to reduce conduct problems: A randomized trial with
Hispanic and non-Hispanic children. Prevention Science
3(2):83–94, June 2002.
Battistich, V.; Solomon, D.; Watson, M.; and Schaps, E. Caring
school communities. Educational Psychologist 32(3):137–151, 1997.
Bauman, K.E.; Foshee, V.A.; Ennett, S.T.; Pemberton, M.;
Hicks, K.A.; King, T.S.; and Koch, G.G. The influence of a family
program on adolescent tobacco and alcohol. American Journal
of Public Health 91(4):604–610, 2001.
Beauvais, F.; Chavez, E.; Oetting, E.; Deffenbacher, J.; and
Cornell, G. Drug use, violence, and victimization among White
American, Mexican American, and American Indian dropouts,
students with academic problems, and students in good academic
standing. Journal of Counseling Psychology 43:292–299, 1996.
Botvin, G.; Baker, E.; Dusenbury, L.; Botvin, E.; and Diaz, T.
Long-term follow-up results of a randomized drug-abuse prevention
trial in a white middle class population. Journal of the American
Medical Association 273:1106–1112, 1995.
Botvin, G.; Epstein, J.; Baker, E.; Diaz, T.; and Ifill-Williams, M.
School-based drug abuse prevention with inner-city minority youth.
Journal of Child and Adolescent Substance Abuse 6:5–19, 1997.
Botvin, G.; Griffin, K.; Diaz, T.; Miller, N.; and Ifill-Williams, M.
Smoking initiation and escalation in early adolescent girls:
One-year follow-up of a school based prevention intervention
for minority youth. Journal of American Medical
Women’s Association 54:139–143, 152, 1999.
Botvin, G.; Griffin, K.W.; Paul, E.; and Macaulay, A.P. Preventing
tobacco and alcohol use among elementary school students
through Life Skills Training. Journal of Child and Adolescent
Substance Abuse 12(4):1–18, 2003.
Catalano, R.F.; Gainey, R.R.; Fleming, C.B.; Haggerty, K.P.; and
Johnson, N.O. An experimental intervention with families of
substance abusers: One-year follow-up of the Focus on Families
Project. Addiction 94(2):241–254, 1999.
Catalano, R.F.; Haggerty, K.P.; Fleming, C.B.; Brewer, D.D.; and
Gainey, R.R. Children of substance abusing parents: Current
findings from the Focus on Families project. In: McMahon, R.J.,
and Peters, R.D., eds. The Effects of Parental Dysfunction on
Children. New York: Kluwer Academic Press/Plenum Publishers,
pp.179–204, 2002.
Chou, C.; Montgomery, S.; Pentz, M.; Rohrbach, L.; Johnson, C.;
Flay, B.; and Mackinnon, D. Effects of a community-based
prevention program in decreasing drug use in high-risk adolescents.
American Journal of Public Health 88:944–948, 1998.
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. Evaluation of the
first three years of the Fast Track Prevention Trial with children at
high risk for adolescent conduct problems. Journal of Abnormal
Child Psychology 30(1):19–35, 2002a.
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. Predictor variables
associated with positive Fast Track outcomes at the end of third
grade. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 30(1):37–52, 2002b.
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. The implementation
of the Fast Track Program: An example of a large-scale prevention
science efficacy trial. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology
30(1):1–17, 2002c.
Dishion, T.; McCord, J.; and Poulin, F. When interventions harm:
Peer groups and problem behavior. American Psychologist
54:755–764, 1999.
Dishion, T. and Kavanagh, K.A. multilevel approach to family-cen­
tered prevention in schools: Process and outcome.
Addictive Behaviors 25:899–911, 2000.
Dishion, T.; Kavanagh, K.; Schneiger, A.K.J.; Nelson, S.; and
Kaufman, N. Preventing early adolescent substance use: A
family centered strategy for the public middle school.
Prevention Science 3(3):191–202, 2002.
Eggert, L.L.; Thompson, E.A.; Herting, J.R.; Nicholas, L.J.; and
Dicker, B. Preventing adolescent drug abuse and high school
dropout through an intensive school-based social network devel­
opment program. American Journal of Health Promotion
8:201–215, 1994.
Eggert, L.L.; Thompson, E.A.; Herting, J.R.; and Nicholas, L.J.
Reducing suicide potential among high-risk youth: Tests of a
school-based prevention program. Suicide & Life-Threatening
Behavior 25(2):276–296, 1995.
Eggert, L.L.; Herting, J.; and Thompson, E. The drug involvement
scale for adolescents (DISA). Journal of Drug Education
26:101–130, 1996.
Eggert, L.L.; Thompson, E.A.; Herting, J.R.; and Randall, B.P.
Reconnecting youth to prevent drug abuse, school dropout, and
suicidal behaviors among high-risk youth. In Wagner, E., and
Waldron, H.B., eds. Innovations in Adolescent Substance Abuse
Intervention. Oxford: Elsevier Science, pp. 51–84, 2001.
Eisen, M.; Zellman, G.L.; Massett, H.A.; and Murray, D.M.
Evaluating the Lions-Quest “Skills for Adolescence” drug
education program: First-year behavior outcomes.
Addictive Behaviors 27(4):619–632, 2002.
Eisen, M.; Zellman, G.L.; and Murray, D.M. Evaluating the
Lions-Quest “Skills for Adolescence” drug education program:
Second-year behavior outcomes. Addictive Behaviors
28(5):883–897, 2003.
Preventing Drug Use among Children and Adolescents
Gerstein, D.R., and Green, L.W., eds. Preventing Drug Abuse: What
Do We Know? Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1993.
Goldberg, L.; MacKinnon, D.P.; Elliot, D.L.; Moe, E.L.; Clarke, G.;
and Cheong, J.W. The Adolescents Training and Learning to
Avoid Steroids Program. Preventing drug use and promoting
health behaviors. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine
154:332–338, April 2000.
Greenberg, M.T., and Kusche, C.A. Preventive interventions for
school-age deaf children: The PATHS curriculum. Journal of Deaf
Studies & Deaf Education 3(1):49–63, 1998.
Greenberg, M.T. and Kusche, C.A. Promoting Alternative Thinking
Strategies. In Blueprint for Violence Prevention (Book 10).
Institute of Behavioral Sciences, University of Colorado, 1998.
Hansen, W.B.; Giles, S.M.; and Fearnow-Kenney, M.D. Improving
Prevention Effectiveness. Greensboro, NC: Tanglewood
Research, 2000.
Hawkins, J.D. and Catalano, R.F. Communities That Care: Action
for Drug Abuse Prevention. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 1992.
Hawkins, J.D.; Catalano, R.F.; Kosterman, R.; Abbott, R.; and
Hill, K.G. Preventing adolescent health-risk behaviors by
strengthening protection during childhood. Archives of Pediatric
and Adolescent Medicine 153:226–234, 1999.
Hawkins, J.D.; Catalano, R.F.; and Arthur, M. Promoting science-
based prevention in communities. Addictive Behaviors
90(5):1–26, 2002.
Hecht, M.; Trost, M.; Bator, R.; and MacKinnon, D. Ethnicity and
sex similarities and differences in drug resistance. Journal of
Applied Communication Research 25:75–97, 1997.
Ialongo, N.; Werthamer, L.; Kellam, S.; Brown, C.; Wang, S.; and
Lin, Y. Proximal impact of two first-grade preventive
interventions on the early risk behaviors for later substance abuse,
depression, and antisocial behavior. American Journal
of Community Psychology 27:599–641, 1999.
Ialongo, N.; Poduska, J.; Werthamer, L.; and Kellam, S. The distal
impact of two first-grade preventive interventions on
conduct problems and disorder in early adolescence. Journal
of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders 9:146–160, 2001.
Johnston, L.D.; O’Malley, P.M.; and Bachman, J.G. Monitoring
the Future National Survey Results on Drug Use, 1975–2002.
Volume 1: Secondary School Students. Bethesda, MD: National
Institute on Drug Abuse, 2002.
Kosterman, R.; Hawkins, J.D.; Spoth, R.; Haggerty, K.P.; and
Zhu, K. Effects of a preventive parent-training intervention on
observed family interactions: proximal outcomes from Preparing
for the Drug Free Years. Journal of Community Psychology
25(4):337–352, 1997.
Kosterman, R.; Hawkins, J.D.; Haggerty, K.P.; Spoth, R.; and
Redmond, C. Preparing for the Drug Free Years: Session-specific
effects of a universal parent-training intervention with rural
families. Journal of Drug Education 31(1):47–68, 2001.
Kumpfer, K.L.; Molgaard, V.; and Spoth, R. The “Strengthening
Families Program” for the prevention of delinquency and drug
abuse. In: Peters, R.D., and McMahon, R.J., eds. Preventing
Childhood Disorders, Substance Abuse, and Delinquency.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1996.
Kumpfer, K.L.; Olds, D.L.; Alexander, J.F.; Zucker, R.A.; and
Gary, L.E. Family etiology of youth problems. In: Ashery, R.S.;
Robertson, E.B.; and Kumpfer K.L.; eds. Drug Abuse Prevention
Through Family Interventions. NIDA Research Monograph No.
177. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office,
pp. 42–77, 1998.
Kumpfer, K.L.; Alvarado, R.; Smith, P.; and Bellamy, N. Cultural
sensitivity in universal family-based prevention interventions.
Prevention Science 3(3):241–246, 2002.
Kumpfer, K.L.; Alvarado, R.; Tait, C.; and Turner, C. Effectiveness
of school-based family and children’s skills training for substance
abuse prevention among 6-8 year old rural children.
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 16(4S):S65–S71, 2002.
Lochman, J.E. and Wells, K.C. The Coping Power Program at
the middle-school transition: Universal and indicated prevention
effects. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 16(45):S40–S54, 2002.
Lonczak, H.S., Abbott, R.D., Hawkins, J.D., Kosterman, R., and
Catalano, R.F. Effects of the Seattle Social Development Project
on sexual behavior, pregnancy, birth, and sexually transmitted
disease outcomes at age 21 years. Archives of Pediatric and
Adolescent Medicine 156:438–447, May 2002.
Moon, D.; Hecht, M.; Jackson, K.; and Spellers, R. Ethnic and
gender differences and similarities in adolescent drug use and
refusals of drug offers. Substance Use and Misuse
34(8):1059–1083, 1999.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. National Conference on
Drug Abuse Prevention Research: Presentations, Papers, and
Recommendations. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug
Abuse, 1998.
National Institute on Drug Abuse
O’Donnell, J.; Hawkins, J.; Catalano, R.; Abbott, R.; and Day, L.
Preventing school failure, delinquency among low-income
children: Long-term intervention in elementary schools.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 65:87–100, 1995.
Oetting, E.; Edwards, R.; Kelly, K.; and Beauvais, F. Risk and
protective factors for drug use among rural American youth.
In: Robertson, E.B.; Sloboda, Z.; Boyd, G.M.; Beatty, L.; and
Kozel, N.J., eds. Rural Substance Abuse: State of Knowledge and
Issues. NIDA Research Monograph No. 168. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office, pp. 90–130, 1997.
Palmgreen, P.; Donohew, L.; Lorch, E.P.; Hoyle, R.H.; and
Stephenson, M.T. Television campaigns and adolescent marijuana
use: Tests of sensation seeking targeting. American Journal of
Public Health 91(2):292–296, 2001.
Palmgreen, P.; Donohew, L.; Lorch, E.P.; Hoyle, R.H.; and
Stephenson, M.T. Television campaigns and sensation seeking
targeting of adolescent marijuana use: A controlled time series
approach. In: Hornik, R.C, ed. Public Health Communication:
Evidence for Behavior Change. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum,
pp. 35–56, 2002.
Pentz, M.A. Costs, benefits, and cost-effectiveness of compre­
hensive drug abuse prevention. In: Bukoski, W.J., and
Evans, R.I., eds. Cost-Benefit/Cost-Effectiveness Research
of Drug Abuse Prevention: Implications for Programming and
Policy. NIDA Research Monograph No. 176. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office, pp. 111–129,1998.
Plested, B.; Smitham, D.; Jumper-Thurman, P., Oetting, E., and
Edwards, R. Readiness for drug use prevention in rural minority
communities. Substance Use And Misuse 34(4 and 5):521–544, 1999.
Scheier, L.; Botvin, G.; Diaz, T.; and Griffin, K. Social skills,
competence, and drug refusal efficacy as predictors of adolescent
alcohol use. Journal of Drug Education 29(3): 251–278, 1999.
Spoth, R.; Redmond, C.; and Shin, C. Reducing adolescents’
aggressive and hostile behaviors: Randomized trial effects of
a brief family intervention four years past baseline. Archives of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 154(12):1248–1257, 2000.
Spoth, R.; Redmond, C.; and Shin, C. Randomized trial of brief
family interventions for general populations: Adolescent
substance use outcomes four years following baseline. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 69(4):627–642, 2001.
Spoth, R.; Guyull, M.; and Day, S. Universal family-focused
interventions in alcohol-use disorder prevention: Cost effectiveness
and cost-benefit analyses of two interventions. Journal of Studies
on Alcohol 63:219–228, 2002a.
Spoth, R.L.; Redmond, D.; Trudeau, L.; and Shin, C. Longitudinal
substance initiation outcomes for a universal preventive intervention
combining family and school programs. Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors 16(2):129–134, 2002b.
Sussman, S.; Dent, C.W.; and Stacy, A.W. Project Toward No
Drug Abuse: A review of the findings and future directions.
American Journal of Health Behavior 26(5):354–365, 2002.
Thompson, E.; Horn, M.; Herting, J.; and Eggert, L. Enhancing
outcomes in an indicated drug prevention program for high-risk
youth. Journal of Drug Education 27(1):19–41, 1997.
Thornton, T.N., et al., eds. Best Practices of Youth Violence
Prevention: A Sourcebook for Community Action. Atlanta, GA:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, September 2000.
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Special Education
Research and Improvement, Office of Reform Assistance
and Dissemination, Safe, Disciplined, and Drug-Free Schools
Programs, Washington, DC, 2001.
Webster-Stratton, C. Preventing conduct problems in Head Start
children: Strengthening parenting competencies. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 66:715–730, 1998.
Webster-Stratton, C.; Reid, J.; and Hammond, M. Preventing
conduct problems, promoting social competence: A parent and
teacher training partnership in Head Start. Journal of Clinical
Child Psychology 30:282–302, 2001.
Wills, T. and Cleary, S. How are social support effects mediated?
A test with parental support and adolescent substance use.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 71:937–952, 1996.
Wills, T.; McNamara, G.; Vaccaro, D.; and Hirky, A. Escalated
substance use: A longitudinal grouping analysis from early to
middle adolescence. Journal of Abnormal Psychology
105:166–180, 1996.
 / ('!.'*) * 		
,').#" 
#+,').#"   	
#!*)" "'.'*) !.* #, 	