Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
A Discussion Paper on Preventing
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Other
Drug Problems
September 1993
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Public Health Service
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
If you have issues viewing or accessing this file contact us at NCJRS.gov.
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
. PreventionW()'RKS!
. ~
< !~3' :;:~~~'tt~~ztr(f;..-: 1L'~~:t,'~ .• ;rf ';:1fr~"':'~~1{~t~~
A Discussion Paper on Preventing
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Other
Drug Problems
U.S. Department of Justice
National Institute of Justice
This document has been repro juced exactly as received from the
p~rson or organization originatin(J it. Points of view or opinions stated In
this do.c~ment a~e those of t.he authors and do not necessarily represent
the official position or policies of the National Institute of Justice.
Permission to reproduce this
q j jhll material has been
granted by
Pllblic Domain/u.s
Dept. of
Health and Human Services
to the National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS).
Further reproduction outside of the NCJRS system requires permission
of the ~
owner.
September 1993
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Public Health Service
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
This Discussion Paper was prepared pursuant to a Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) contract with
Social & Health Services Ltd. The opinions in this document do not necessarily reflect the opinions, official policy,
or position of CSAP, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), the Public
Health Service, or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
All material in this paper is in the public domain and may be used or reproduced without permission from CSAP or
the authors. Citation of the source is appreciated.
Acknowledgments
Judith E. Funkhouser and Robert W. Denniston of CSAP directed the development of this paper. Appreciation also
is extended to more than 100 people who provided critical technical and editorial review, including William
Butinsky of the National Association of State Alcohol and Drug Abuse Directors; Michael Stoil of the Washington
Area Council on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse; Joseph Gfroerer of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration; Nancy Kennedy, Rosalyn Bass, Steve Gardner, Darie Davis, and Cathy Nugent of CSAP; and
Nancy Klein, Darcy Otis, Peggy Williams, and George Marcelle of Social & Health Services Ltd. Cathy Crowley
and the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Infonnation (NCADI) staff were invaluable in providing
research assistance.
About the Authors
Lewis D. Eigen, Ed.D., is a fonner Associate Professor of Educational Psychology at Temple University and has
lectured at dozens of other colleges and universities throughout the country. He fonnerly served as the Project
Director of the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Infonnation, the Federal Government's leading
infonnation and public education resource for demand reduction and prevention. He currently serves as the Presi-
dent and Chief Executive Officer of Social & Health Services Ltd. He has had management responsibilities for the
National School Resource Network, National Drug Abuse Education Center, and the National Center for Alcohol
Education.
David W. Rowden, Ph.D., is a medical sociologist with 18 years of experience in health promotion, health educa-
tion, and research. Currently the Project Director of NCADI, he received his advanced training in medical schools.
He served on the graduate and medical faculties of the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston. Among
his graduate faculty duties were teaching courses in the scientific method, philosophy of science, research design,
and biostatistics. He also received additional training through the Center for Educational Development in Health
while in residence as a fellow in the Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, Harvard Medical School. He
has held management positions with the National High Blood Pressure Education Program and National Center for
Alcohol Education and with projects funded by the Rehabilitation Services Administration and the Health Resources
and Services Administration.
Slides
A set of slides illustrating many of the points in this paper has been prepared. For availability of these slides or
additional copies of this document contact CSAP's:
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information
P.O. Box 2345
Rockville, MD 20847
1-800-729-6686
TDD 1-800-487-4889
In addition, the appendix contains full-size graphics with which the user may make overhead transparencies.
From the Acting Director of CSAP. It
Prevention efforts are largely responsible for a downward trend in the use of alcohol, tobacco,
and other drugs over the last decade. However, these efforts need to be sustained, as well as
substantially strengthened if we are to continue to make prevention work better for everyone.
As you will see from this Discussion Paper, prevention and treatment efforts have made major
gains in reversing the trend toward more and more alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use. The
numbers are impressive: Nearly 25 million young adults are not using drugs who might have
been if demand reduction efforts had not reached them.
Prevention has been especially effective for adolescents. In 1979, 18 percent of all 12- to 17-year-
olds used illicit drugs and by 1991, only 7 percent were using illicit drugs. This decrease represents
more than 2.5 million adolescents who would have been using illicit drugs if the 1979 level of drug
use had continued. The decline holds true for alcohol use among adolescents as well-alcohol use
among adolescents dropped from 37 percent in 1979 to under 20 percent in 1991.
This news is encouraging. However, there are three major reasons not to become complacent.
First, there are always new young people coming into each age group; for example new elemen-
tary age youth who will be pressured to use alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs at even these very
early ages. There could be a rapid reverse in previous prevention gains without continued and
sustained efforts to persuade youth to "Be Smart!" Don't Start"; to teach them resistance, social,
and other skills; and to provide community support and policies for their non-use choices.
Second, for those who are choosing at an early age to engage in the high-risk behavior of alco-
hol, tobacco, and other drug (ATOD) use, more intensive efforts are required to persuade them
that they can make healthier and safer choices for themselves and those around them. They need
to know that ATOD use is closely linked to juvenile delinquency, school failure, mY/AIDS
transmission, violence, injury, and death. Teens who are making such unhealthy and unsafe
choices, the future employees of American business, jeopardize our future abilities to compete in
the global marketplace.
And third, we know that some audiences are at less risk than others. These are people who live
in communities that have comprehensive prevention programs and norms and practices sanction-
ing non-use of substances by youth; that discourage abuse; and provide treatment for those who
are dependent.
As successful as prevention has become, there are still many people who have not yet benefitted
from these messages. For instance:
.. There are still over 4 million youngsters who drink illegally.
.. There are more than 1.3 million adolescents, 4 million young adults, and 7
million older adults who use illicit drugs.
, Alcohol-related traffic fatalities and Alcohol and Other Drug (AOD)-related
violence are still the leading causes of death for America's teenagers.
Therefore, to reach an even larger audience, we must redouble our prevention efforts. For the
elementary-age students just beginning to be able to comprehend and integrate no-use mes-
sages and resistance skills, we must provide comprehensive prevention efforts. For the rebel-
lious, high sensation-seeking teenager, we must increase our ability to offer healthy and safe
alternatives to chemicals. And, in our neighborhoods we must enlist families, as well as the
business community in helping provide prevention opportunities for all. This is just the begin-
ning of many prevention strategies that can be implemented and sustained through community
partnerships, where everyone gets involved with and is committed to preventing alcohol,
tobacco, and other drug problems.
Our theme for the 1990's and into the new century must be: Let's Make Prevention Work
for Everyone!
Vivian L. Smith, M.S.W.
Acting Director
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
Contents
Introduction
What Is Prevention? .......................................................... 9
What Are Prevention Strategies? ................................................ 10
What Are the Benefits of Prevention? ............................................ 13
Analysis
DrugUse .................................................................. 20
Who Are Prevention Beneficiaries? .............................................. 21
Other Indicators of Success .................................................... 29
Corroborating Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 35
Discussion
Are Prevention Gains Just the Result of Natural Cycles? ............................. 37
Could the Decade's Prevention Gains Be the Result ofInterdiction? .................... 38
Why Does Prevention Become Harder As It Succeeds? .............................. 39
If Prevention Is Working, Why Do We Still Have a Problem? ......................... 40
What If We Found a "Cure" for Addiction? ....................................... 40
What Is the Annual National Expenditure for Prevention? ............................ 41
If Prevention Is Working, Why Do ATOD Costs Seem to Be Increasing? ................ 42
Conclusion
What More Needs to Be Done? ................................................. 43
Appendix
Limitations of the Data and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 47
Page 7
-----------------------
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
A Discussion Paper on Preventing
Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Other Drug Problems
What Is Prevention?
Prevention is the sum of our actions to ensure healthy,
safe, and productive lives for all Americans. All segments
of society must be involved-health, family, labor, justice,
social service, individual, education, commerce, media, and
housing-to ensure that prevention works for everyone. In
this paper, prevention is described as those efforts that keep
alcohol, tobacco, and other drug (ATGD) problems from
occuning by reducing risk factors. Some problems are
prevented by ensuring that at-risk popUlations do not use
these substances, while other problems are prevented when
these substances are not consumed in conjunction with
other behaviors, e.g., drinking and driving. Prevention also
occurs when those who have developed ATOD problems
stop using these substances. Not all problems, however,
are related to dependence on these substances. ATOD
problems are associated with fires, crimes, drownings, rape,
school failure, child abuse, injury, disease, violence, lost
productivity, and so forth. To reduce the risk of ATOD
problems is to reduce the risk for many other of society's
problems as well.
Prevention, intervention, and treatment are partners in
reducing ATOD problems. This paper focuses on preven-
tion as the most effective of the three. A smoke detector in
your home is important, but when it goes off, your house is
already burning down. And though the firefighters will do a
great job putting out the fire, you will still be left picldng
through the ruins. The best plan is to keep your child from
playing with matches in the first place; install a smoke
detector; and have the emergency numbers on hand.
Page 9
Prevention aims to
foster a safe, healthy,
and productive society.
What Are Prevention Strategies?
Prevention strategies are the sum of all the efforts of our
society-public and private, professional and lay, environ-
mental (community supported) and individual-over the past
years. These strategies have a synergistic impact and the
whole is greater than the parts. For instance, a crack down
on alcohol-impaired drivers is not as effective as having a
media campaign that sends the message that "you are likely
to be caught if you drive after drinking" in conjunction with
the crack down. These strategies include:
Information Dissemination
This strategy provides awareness and knowledge of the
nature and extent of ATOD use, abuse, and addiction and
their effects on individuals, families, and communities, as
well as information to increase perceptions of risk associ-
ated with ATOD use. It also provides knowledge and
awareness of prevention policies, programs, and services. It
helps set and reinforce norms. Raising awareness is impor-
tant in all prevention efforts.
Example: The latest information about alcohol, tobacco,
and other drug problems and ideas for solving them are
available through the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol
and Drug Information, the information service of the
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention.! CSAP also con-
ducts public information and education media campaigns;
outreach initiatives targeted to special populations; and
training and technical assistance to help States and commu-
nities develop their own communications programs.
Prevention Education
This strategy aims to affect critical life and social skills,
including decision making, refusal skills, critical analysis,
and systematic and judgment abilities. Skill-building is
fundamental for programs for youth.
lIn October 1992, the name of the Office for Substance Abuse Prevention
(OSAP) was changed to the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP).
In this paper we use CSAP even when referring to OSAP programs of the
past.
Page 10
Example: Juegos Mentales is just one of the prevention
programs offered by the Nacogdoches Community Coali-
tion, a CSAP-funded community partnership in rural East
Texas. This multicultural task force works with Hispanic
youth to build their self-efficacy and help them attain
educational goals. Or, the Indian Eagles Youth Prevention
Program, a CSAP High Risk Youth project sponsored by
the Red Lake Tribal Council of Red Lake, Minnesota,
which offers educational and cultural events for youth
(middle- and high-school age) and their families.
Alternatives
This strategy provides for the participation of targeted
populations in activities that exclude ATOD use by youth.
Constructive and healthy activities offset the attraction to,
or otherwise meet the needs sometimes filled by, ATOD
use. Alternative programs offer a healthy choice and
mentoring and role modeling activities are often included
as part of this effort.
Example: Orlando Fights Back, a CSAP Community
Partnership grantee in Orange County, Florida, sponsors
healthy activities for youth as alternatives to drugs, includ-
ing a youth Shakespearean company. Or "Programma
Shortstop," a CSAP High Risk Youth project sponsored by
the Orange County Bar Association in Irvine, California
which works closely with local legal entities to divert youth
who are court-referred from incarceration and detention
facilities.
Problem Identification and Referral
This strategy calls for identification, education, and coun-
seling for those youth who have engaged in age-inappropri-
ate use of alcohol, or who have engaged in the first use of
tobacco products or illicit drugs. Activities under this
strategy would include screening for tendencies toward
substance abuse and referral for preemptive treatment to
curb such tendencies.
Example: CSAP has worked with the American Academy
of Pediatrics, the American Academy of Family Physicians,
the American Medical Association, and the Society of
Page 11
Teachers of Family Medicine to develop curricula that help
doctors respond to their patients' ATOD problems. CSAP
also has funded Pasos Adelante (Forward Steps) in La
Frontera Center, Tucson, Arizona, which is an early inter-
vention demonstration program for 3- to 5-year-olds, and
their parents who have a history of ATOD dependency and,
in many cases, are enrolled in treatment. A CSAP Pregnant
and Postpartum Women and Their Infants demonstration
project in Boise, Idaho, identifies infants of alcohol-abus-
ing women and makes appropriate referrals to local agen-
cies.
Community-Based Process
This strategy aims to enhance the ability of the community
to provide effective prevention and treatment services for
ATOD disorders. Activities include organizing, planning,
enhancing efficiency and effectiveness of services imple-
mentation, interagency collaboration, coalition building,
and networking. Building healthy communities encourages
healthy lifestyle choices and results in communities plan-
ning their own combination of various strategies. Commu-
nity mobilization builds commitment for prevention.
Example: The DC Community Prevention Partnership, a
CSAP-funded partnership of 27 public and private agen-
cies, formed separate teams in each of the District's eight
wards. Each team consists of volunteers of all ages and
backgrounds who meet monthly to discuss ATOD issues
and problems in their neighborhoods. The Asian American
Drug Abuse Program of South Central Los Angeles is a
CSAP High Risk Youth Project that is a model collabora-
tive effort between the Korean Youth Center and the
Search to Involve Philippine Americans. These three
agencies provide ATOD programs and servir.es to high-risk
Asian Pacific Islander youth in the area. This project was
especially visible during the 1992 South Central Los
Angeles 11otS, working closely with other local organiza-
tions to stop the violence and restabilize the community.
Page 12
Environmental Approach
This strategy sets up or changes written and unwritten
community standards, codes, and attitudes that influence
the incidence of ATOD problems in the general population.
Included are laws to restrict availability and access, price
increases, and community-wide actions. Advocacy and
policy are central to this prevention strategy.
Example: In South Central Los Angeles, an entire CSAP-
funded Communications and Community Partnership
prevention effort is focusing on shifting social nonns away
from illicit drug use and excessive alcohol consumption
and halting the rebuilding of liquor stores. Another CSAP
Communications program seeks to change the norm of
excessive alcohol consumption by Native Americans in
Oklahoma by focusing on the strengths of Native American
tradition and the strengths of the current culture.
What Are the Benefits of Prevention?
Prevention improves our quality of life. Just as the devas-
tation and cost of alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use and
abuse affects every aspect of our society, prevention ben-
efits our Nation's productivity, health, economy, spiritual
well-being, and cohesiveness.
Prevention Saves Lives
Over half a million Americans will die this year from
a1cohol- and other drug-related causes, including impaired
driving crashes, suicides, drownings, and boating fatalities.
Every single one of those deaths is preventable! Without
prevention, there would be many more.
"Suppose somebody goes into the hospital for a burn-a
serious burn. With .In underlying drug or alcohol problem,
they stay in the hospital two to three times longer. [Sub-
stance abuse] is a problem that permeates the whole sys-
tem. It increases our costs. "2
2 Hillary Rodham Clinton on Fox News (10 pm edition, March 16, 1993)
explaining why alcohol, tobacco, and other drug programs need to be part of
the new national health care plan.
Page 13
Over half a million
Americans will die this
year from ATOD causes.
Every single one of
those deaths is
preventable!
Twenty-five to 40
percent of all
Americans in general
hospital beds are there
for treatment of
complications of
alcoholism.
Every single minute
our Nation pays over
$5 millionfor alcohol-
related injuries.
....
...
Roughly 25 percent of all injuries are alcohol-related. A
heavy drinker increases his or her risk of being burned by a
factor of 10 and of dying in a fall by a factor of 16.3 Fire-
arms and alcohol are another dangerous, often fatal, combi-
nation.
Alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use affect virtually every
organ of the body, including the skin, and are associated
with a variety of diseases, including I~ancer and heart and
liver disease.
These deaths, injuries, and diseases represent years of
productive lives lost. These are lives that could be contrib-
uting to our society and improving America's place in the
new global economy.
Prevention Helps Contain Health Care and
ATOU Problem Costs
A large part of the national health care bill is for alcohol,
tobacco, and other drug-related medical expenses. For
example, 25 to 40 percent of all Americans in general
hospital beds (e.g., not in a maternity or lCU bed) are being
treated for complications of alcoholism.4
Because so many more Americans drink than use illicit
drugs, alcohol problems cost society considerably more
than illicit drug problems. Alcohol-related injuries alone
cost an estimated $47 billion annually.5 This is $188 a year
for every man, woman, and child in the country. It repre-
sents over $5 million every single minute-money that
would be better devoted to reducing the national debt or
funding health reform.
In 1993, Joseph Califano, former Secretary of the Depart-
ment of Health, Education, and Welfare, estimated the cost
3M. J. Eckhatdt et a1., "Health Hazards Associated with Alcohol Consump-
tion," JAMA, 246:648-666,1981.
4 American Medical Association, Factors Contributing to the Health Care Cost
Problem, March 1993.
5Lewis D. Eigen, Localizing the Cost of Alcohol-Related Injuries, paper
presented to The Secretary's National Conference on Alcohol-Related
Injuries, March 1992.
Page 14
ERRATUM
A DISCUSSION PAPER ON PREVENTING
ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND OTHER DRUG PROBLEMS
The sentence beginning at the end of line five of paragraph five on page 14 should read:
It represents over $5 million every single hour-money that would be better devoted to
reducing the national debt or funding health reform.
of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs to our society at $400
billion.6
The health care bill is paid by not only those being treated
for alcohol, tobacco, and other dr.ug addictions and their
direct health consequences, but also by non-using third
parties. Fetal alcohol syndrome, for example, the single
most preventable cause of mental retardation, costs an
estimated $1.4 million over the lifetime of each innocent
child. Between 20 and 30 percent of low-birthweight
deliveries are caused by maternal cigarette smoking.? And
about 10 percent of all fetal and infant deaths are attributed
to the same cause.8 We all pay these costs by loss of loved
ones and through higher taxes, insurance rates, etc.
No study has been done to look at all the costs of alcohol,
tobacco, and other drug use and abuse to date; however, a
study of intensive care units (leUs) by Johns Hopkins
University Hospital reveals the tip of the iceberg.
leus in American hospitals cost up to $3,000 per patient
per day, somewhat less than $50 billion per year nation-
ally.9 Johns Hopkins studied how much of this cost is
caused by alcohol, tobacco, or other drugs. The results: 10
Twenty-eight percent of all admissions (to general and
specialty beds) are alcohol, tobacco, and other drug-
related (9 percent alcohol, 14 percent tobacco, 5 percent
other dmgs).
The ATOD-related admissions were much more severe
than the other 72 percent of admissions, requiring 4.2
days in leU versus 2.8 days.
6 Joseph Califano, Keynote Address, National Prevention Conference,
Washington, DC, March 1993.
7 Public Health Service, Healthy People 2000: National Health Promotion alld
Disease Preventioll Objectives, 1991.
8Ibid.
9T. Raffin et aI., Intensive Care: Facing the Critical Choices, W. C. Freeman &
Co., 1989.
lOW. Andrew Baldwin et aI., "Substance Abuse-Related Admissions to Adult
Intensive Care," CHEST, Vol. 103, January 1993, pp. 21-25.
Page 15
Ten percent of all fetal
and infant deaths are
attributed to maternal
cigarette smoking.
~------------------------------------------I
~ !
Hospital costs are
higher for children of
alcoholics.
The cost per ATOD admission averaged $9,61O-about
63 percent greater than the average cost for other rcu
admissions.
Fully 39 percent of all the costs of the rcu went to treat
ATOD-related diseases.
Johns Hopkins University Hospital may not be typical, and
replication of the study is needed in other parts of the
country. Other researchers, however, have shown the
higher cost of intensive care of ATOD-related disease and
injury. II
There is no evidence that the Johns Hopkins' experience is
extrapolatable to the Nation as a whole. However, if we
were to extrapolate, ATOD-related rcu costs alone would
account for over $19 billion annually. Allowing for the
more expensive cost structure and possible larger propor-
tion of ATOD-related admissions of Johns Hopkins com-
pared to the average hospital, we can conservatively take
half that figure and estimate ATOD-related costs for rcu
admissions at $10 billion. That is more than the Nation
spends annually for all home health care and almost as
much as it spends for the construction of all medical facili-
ties. 12
A study of the health care costs of children of alcoholics
(COAs) in comparison to children who did not live with
this parental problem reveals the subtle, yet profound,
affect of alcoholism and other drugs on our health costS.13
The results included:
A 62 percent greater hospital use rate for COAs than
non-COAs.
II For example, C. L. Taylor et al., "Prospective Study of Alcohol-Related
Admissions in an Inner City Hospital," Lancet, 2:265-268, 1986. R. D. Moore
et al., "Prevalence Detection and Treatment of Alcoholism in Hospitalized
Patients, JAMA, 261:403-407,1989. C. A. Soderstrom and R. A. Crowley, "A
National Alcohol & Trauma Center Survey," Arch Surg, 122:1067-1071,
1987.
2The 1990 costs were $6.9 billion for home health care and $10.4 billion for
construction of medical facilities. U.S. Health Care Financing Administra-
tion, Health Care Financing Review, Fall 1991.
13Children of Alcoholics Foundation, Children of Alcoholics in the Medical
System: Hidden Problems, Hidden Costs, 1990.
Page 16
• I
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
A 24 percent increase in inpatient hospital admissions.
A 29 percent longer average stay in the hospital.
A 36 percent increase in average hospital costs.
It is likely that a similar pattern exists for the children of
illicit drug-dependent persons as well. We pay billions of
dollars for the increased health care costs of the children of
the over 10 million alcoholics and illicit drug-dependent
persons across the Nation.
Prevention Lowers Social Costs of
ATOD-Related Problems
Crime is inextricably related to alcohol and other drugs.
The Department of Health and Human Services reported to
Congress that "In both animal and human studies, alcohol,
more than any other drug, has been linked with a high
incidence of violence and aggression."14 Table 1 shows the
percentage of convicted offenders from the general popula-
tion who had been drinking immediately before their
violent crime. IS These data are generally corroborated by
various studies of the reports of victims' perceptions.16
14NIAAA, Seventh Special Report to the U.S. Congress on Alcohol and Health
from the Secretary of Health and Human Services, U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 1989, p. 144.
ISNlAAA, Alcohol and Health: Sixth Special Report to Congress, Public
Health Service, NIAAA, 1987, p. 13. The data are from 1983. It should be
noted that some researchers argue that the relationship per se does not
necessarily "prove" the causality. It is possible that the propensity to drink
and the likelihood to commit crimes are characteristics of the same subpopu-
lations.
16U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Crime Victimization
in City, Suburban, and Rural Areas, 1992.
Page 17
Table 1
% of Violent Crime Perpetrators
Who Were Drinking
% of Perpe-
Crime
trators
Impaired
Murder I Attempted
54%
Murder
Manslaughter
68%
Rape I Sexual Assault
52%
Robbery
48%
Assault
62%
Burglary
44%
The impaired judgment and violence induced by alcohol
contribute to alcohol-related crime. Rapes, fights, and
assaults leading to injury, manslaughter, and homicide are
often linked with alcohol because the perpetrator, the
victim, or both, were drinking.
Many perpetrators of violent crime were also using illicit
drugs. Some of these drugs, such as PCP and steroids, may
induce violence or be a catalyst for aggressive-prone
individuals who as a result of taking these drugs exhibit
violent behavior.
The economics of illicit drugs often drive violent crime
associated with "turf battles" over selling and distributing
drugs. 17 Most of the illicit drug-associated crimes are
crimes against property to get money to pay for the drugs.
There are almost 800,000 annual arrests for illicit drug
violations. Add to this figure 1.3 million arrests for driving
while intoxicated, 427,000 arrests for liquor law violations,
and 700,000 more arrests for drunkenness-an almost
17Lee Brown, Testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Confirmation
Hearing, June 1993.
Page 18
incredible total of 3.2 million arrests for alcohol and other
drug statutory crimes. As shown in Figure 1, this is fully
one-third of all the arrests in the country. 18 Not included in
this 35 percent are the arrests for alcohol- and other drug-
related crimes such as those previously given in Table 1.
65%
Figure 1
Arrests for Alcohol and
Other Drug Offenses (1990)
iii!! Alcohol & Drug Crimes rn Other Crimes
35%
We cannot put a monetary value on the human lives and the
quality thereof that are affected by alcohol, tobacco, and
other drugs. Nonetheless, we can imagine the child welfare
and protective services and court costs needed to deal with
the consequences of alcohol and other drug problems. The
cost to arrest, try, sentence, and incarcerate the guilty
people arrested for these 3.2 million alcohol- and other
drug-related offenses is a tremendous drain on the Nation's
resources.
Prevention Reduces Fear and
Concern About ATOD Problems
Alcohol and other drug use and abuse in our society cause
fear, anxiety, and concern. Most of us are familiar with the
fear of illicit drug-associated crime, but the concern about
what to do about alcohol and other drugs presses on parents
and children alike. Nearly 40 percent of parents feel that
"drugs and alcohol" are the most worrisome risk for their
children. 19 Young people are equally concerned. In over
18Federal Bureau ofInvestigation, Crime in the United States, 1990. The
statistics include all arrests except for traffic offenses such as speeding or
running a red light.
19National Safe Kids Campaign survey reported in USA Today, January 25,
1993.
Page 19
One third of all arrests
in the U.S. are alcohol-
and drug-related.
Nearly 40 percent of
parents feel that
"drugs and alcohol"
are the most worrisome
riskfor their children.
11,000 letters written to Congress by young people, the
most frequent concern was what to do about alcohol and
other drugs.20
Prevention Involves Everyone
Every day, hundreds of Americans become involved in
prevention activities-the middle-aged woman who starts a
drug awareness program for the elderly in memory of her
mother; the cancer-stricken football player who speaks out
on steroids. Unfortunately, these people have learned the
value of prevention through tragic, costly lessons.
Just as ATOD-related problems cut across every age,
economic, and cultural group, from citizens in our largest
cities to those in the most isolated areas of the Nation, so
do prevention-related efforts. At the individua1level, you
can start with the belief that you can be part of the solution.
At the community partnership level, strategies, programs,
policies, and resources are required.
Prevention will be the most effective when everyone
becomes involved in keeping alcohol, tobacco, and other
drug problems from happening.
Drug Use
Drug use in this paper is measured by the percentage of a
population using drugs during the last 30 days as measured
by the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse. By
reviewing this percentage, we can examine the effects of
prevention over time even if the population decreases or
increases because we are looking at the percent who have
used or are using drugs. For example, if there are 1 million
users in a popUlation of 10 million, then 10 percent are
users of drugs. If a decade later the popUlation is 9 million
and the number of users is reduced to 900,000, the percent
of users is still 10 percent even though there are 100,000
fewer users. The number of users declined but the percent-
age of the using population did not change.
2°NIDA, Analysis for Senate Judiciary Committee, Prevention Pipeline
Executive Edition, Vol. 2, No.1, 1993.
Page 20
•••
In Figures 2 through 8 on the following pages, we use data
from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse
conducted by the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA)2l from 1979 to 199122,23 to examine the percentage
of the population who said they used alcohol, tobacco, and
other drugs in a 3~-day period. The latest published, full
survey (1991) included a national probability sample of
more than 30,000 households. There was no 1980 or 1981
study, so the closest interval, a decade or larger, is the 12-
year period from 1979 to 1991. Preliminary findings from
the 1992 Survey, conducted by the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration, suggests that the
decreasing trends of the last decade are continuing.
Figures 2 through 8 are available as slides for presentations.
For more information, contact the National Clearinghouse
for Alcohol and Drug Information at 1-800-729-6686.
Who Are Prevention Beneficiaries?
If prevention is successful, alcohol, tobacco, and other
drug use decreases. The people who do not become new
users are prevention beneficiaries, as are those who do not
misuse legal substances (for example, alcohol) in high-risk
circumstances (e.g., prior to driving a car or a boat), and
those who do not engage in excessive consumption. Be-
cause prevention stops alcohol, tobacco, and other drug
problems from occurring, prevention beneficiaries are more
often the young. As the group gets older, it benefits increas-
ingly from intervention and treatment. In the following
pages, we look at adolescent, young adult, and adult pre-
vention beneficiaries.
21 Administrative responsibility for the National Household Survey was
transferred from NIDA to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration in October 1992 pursuant to the ADAMHA Reorganization
Act of 1992.
22NIDA, National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: 1991, U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service.
23There are three general prevalence periods measured by the Household
Survey: Lifetime prevalence, yearly prevalence, and 30-day prevalence. We
selected the latter as our basic indicator. The data herein are given andlor
derived from these surveys.
Page 21
Figure 2
Adolescent Illicit Drug 3D-Day Use
(Ages 12-17)
00/0 +-----~~----~--____ ~------~
Figure 2 shows the actual adolescent illicit drug use data
for 1979-1991.24 The dark solid line shows the downward
trend. In 1979, adolescent drug use was at 18 percent. It
went down by 1982, rose slightly unti11985, and then
declined constantly. The unshaded area of the graph repre-
sents illicit drug users. The straight dotted line at the top of
the graph shows what the drug use level would have been if
1979 patterns prevailed through 1991.25
The shaded area represents prevention beneficiaries, those
adolescents who did not use illicit drugs who would have if
the percentage of the population using illicit drugs re-
mained the same from 1979 to 1991.
Because the percentage of adolescent users decreased
beginning in 1979, we should see a decrease in the 3D-day
use rates of these adolescents as they become young adults.
As we see in the following figures, this is the case.
24The data for 1979 to 1990 are found in: National Institute for Drug Abuse,
National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Main Findings 1990 & Popula-
tion Estimates 1991, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public
Health Service.
25This is considered to be a reasonably conservative assumption of what would
have occurred because the availability and access to illicit drugs have not
decreased. Illicit drugs are all too easy to obtain, yet the vast majority of our
population do not use them.
Page 22
Adolescent Prevention Beneficiaries
The Nation's children have been the focus of much of our
prevention efforts. We believe these efforts made a signifi-
cant contribution to the steady downward trend of adoles-
cent illicit drug use as shown in Figure 3. In 1979, 18
percent of all 12- to 17-year-olds in the country used illicit
drugs in any given month. By 1991, use was below 7
percent.26 This represents an 11 percent decrease in drug
use, representing over 2.5 million adolescents who would
be using illicit drugs if the 1979 trends still prevailed.
Figure 3
Adolescent ATOD 30-Day Prevalence
(Ages 12-17)
40%
.......................................................................................................................... .
30%
......... _ .. ,. .... "':'::'
... !'jI. --.'"!'! .. ~
.... ~
.... ~
... !I.
... .....
20%
....................................................................................................................... ..
1~ ~~
... "'~~- ... ~~
.... :-ffJ'~~~:
"""
.... ""~c:c ....
"ON.\oO
...
1:: r--··_·_·
•• _ _ .  .~
..... -- Illicit Drugs -- Alcohol
.,~. Cigarettes
Source: NIDA, 1991 Household Survey
The drug most frequently used by 12- to 17- year-olds-
and the one that causes the most negative health conse-
quences-is alcohol. In 1979, 37 percent of adolescents
drank alcohol in any given month. By 1991 that percentage
had been reduced to 20 percent-a statistically significant
decrease. We do not know exactly why, but among the
most likely causes are-changes in perceptions, attitudes,
and norms, as well as changes in availability and access.
26We emphasize that this benefit has not been uniform across all demographic
segments of our population. Some have fared much better, while others have
benefited little. This is a national average.
Page 23
Over 2.5 million
youngsters will not use
illicit drugs who would
have if the trends of
1979 still prevailed.
Almost 3 million adolescents who do not drink in any given
month would have if the trends of 1979 still prevailed.
Imagine a national ceremony with all American high school
graduates of 1991 gathered in convocation in a single place.
The total number of adolescent alcohol prevention benefi-
ciaries is much larger.27
Although these numbers are encouraging, Figure 4 shows
that much work remains to be done.
Figure 4
Result of Effort to Prevent Adolescent Drug Use
1979-1991
(Ages 12-17)
40%
.••.••...•..•..•.•••••..•....••.•.•...•••..••....•....•..............••...
30%
20%
10%
Illicit Drugs
Alcohol
Cigarettes
1_1991 Rate [] Prevented I
Figure 4 summarizes the prevention benefits for adoles-
cents. The dark, rectangular portion of each bar shows the
1991 3D-day prevalence. The entire bar, including the
hollow portion, shows what the dlUg use rate would have
been if 1979 norms and practices prevailed. The hollow
portion, therefore, shows adolescent prevention beneficia-
ries.
Unfortunately, Figure 4 also shows that over 4 million
adolescents still drink illegally in any given month. And,
the striking success of prevention with illicit drugs and
alcohol for adolescents is in marked contrast to the small
prevention gains with cigarettes. These youth need more
consistent, repetitive, and intensive prevention efforts.
27 About 2 million graduates. U.S. Department of Education, National Center
for Education Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics, annual.
Page 24
I',' ;
Figure 5
Young Adult ATOD 3D-Day Drug Use
(Ages 18-25)
80%
,--~''''-"-''''''-~-'''''-'''''''''''-,,--''''''''''-'''''''.-''''''''.,,.'''''''''.",,,,,,.,,.
60%
................................................................... ".~ ................................................. .
00/0 +-------~~------~--------+-------~
....;:~ Illicit Drugs -- Alcohol
'" ~'" Cigarettes
Source: NIDA, 1991 Household Survey
Young Adult Prevention Beneficiaries
Figure 5 illustrates the steady decline in illicit drug,
alcohol, and cigarette use by young adults (18 to 25) over
time. In contrast to underage adolescents, alcohol and
cigarettes are legal drugs for about half the young adult
population.28 And many 21-year-old drinking laws did not
come into effect until the middle of the time period.
Prevention success with this age group is particularly
important. Young adults between 18- anc;l25-years-old are
more likely than other Americans to use illegal drugs,
smoke cigarettes, and drink heavily. This age group has the
most illicit drug overdose deaths, acute alcohol lJoisonings,
and violence associated with alcohol and some illicit drugs.
28The authors and the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention are not advocat-
ing a "no use of alcohol" policy for adults 21 and older. Rather, the U.S.
Dietary Guidelines prepared by the Departments of Agriculture and Health
and Human Services form the basis for advice on adult drinking. The
Guidelines also are consistent with Healthy People 2000, the national health
promotion and disease prevention plan prepared by the Department of Health
and Human Services in consultation with groups nationwide.
Page 25
24 million young adults
do not use illicit drugs
in any given month-
more than the
combined population of
our 10 largest cities.
In 1979, in any given month, one out of every three young
adults used an illicit drug. By 1991, drug use was down to
one out of seven. The 15 percent 1991 drug use rate is still
dangerously high. Over 4 million young adults still use
illicit drugs in any given month, a number larger than the
entire population of the greater Boston area. Yet, another
24 million do not-a population greater than America's 10
largest cities combined.29
If 1979 trends and patterns still prevailed, 6 million addi-
tional young adults would have been involved with illicit
drugs in any given month in 1991. These 6 million young
adults are prevention beneficiaries.
Figure 6
Young Adult 3D-Day Drug Use
Prevention Gains, 1979-1991
(Ages 18-25)
80 010 ............................................................... .
60%
40%
20%
Illicit Drugs
Alcohol
Cigarettes
1_1991 Rate 0 Prevented I
In Figure 6, we added alcohol and tobacco prevention
beneficiaries to illicit drug prevention beneficiaries. We
estimate that the total number of young adult prevention
beneficiaries is 5.4 million--more than one-fourth of the
entire young adult population.3D In addition, many millions
29New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Houston, Philadelphia, San Diego,
Detroit, Dallas, Phoenix, and San Antonio. Bureau of the Census, U.S.
Department of Commerce, 1990 Census.
30The exact number of prevention beneficiaries is not known because the 21
percent for illicit drugs, 12 percent for alcohol, and 10 percent for cigarettes
include some of the same individuals (i.e., poly·substance users). If the
percentages were independent, their sum would exceed 43 percent. If there
were total overlap, the sum would be 21 percent. Therefore, the 25 percent
estimate is conservative.
Page 26
more are indirect beneficiaries. The crimes that were not
committed to get money for illicit drugs, the educations that
were completed, and the tax money that was not used to
pay for the negative consequences of alcohol, tobacco, and
other drug use-these all provide benefits to other Ameri-
cans.
Young adults have the highest smoking rate of this paper's
three age groups. That fact was true in 1979 and is still true.
However, thanks to prevention, 2 million fewer young
adults smoked in 1991 than in 1979.
Figure 7
Adult ATOD 30-Day Use
(Ages 26+)
75%
\ .......................................................................................................... .
:s: _ _
50% " ... ~ .. ~ ... ~ .... ~ .. ~: .. ~ ... ~ ... : ..... ~ .......................... -.- ........................•
25% j... ... .... .. ........................ ~ .. :~ .. ~ .~ ... ~ .. ~ .. ~~.~ .... o,~ ... ~~.~.<l:
'-_-... ....,..;;·w
:·""'r ___ _
0% r
-;:''----.......
-'-lllicit Drugs -x- Alcohol
.. ,~, Cigarettes
Source: NIDA, 1991 Household Survey
Adult Prevention Beneficiaries
Although adult ATOD use steadily declined from 1979 to
1991, the rate was not as dramatic as the younger age
groups' rate, as shown in Figure 7. Of the three age groups
we examined, the adult population of America (age 26 and
01der31 ) has always had the highest alcohol and cigarette
smoking use rates and the lowest illicit drug use rates.
liThe Household Survey divides the adult population into two age group
subpopulations. We have combined them in this paper.
Page 27
Prevention efforts are more efficacious for those under the
age of 25 since few initiate alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drug
use after this age (with some exceptions, e.g., cocaine,
prescription drugs), and it is easier to shape the attitudes
and influence the behavior of someone who has not started
to use drugs than to change the behavior of those who
already use/misuse. In addition, the age of first use is very
important. Those who begin to use alcohol, tobacco, and
other drugs at early ages also develop more problems
associated with these substances. Further, few people start
using drugs (especially alcohol and tobacco) past age 18,
and additional delay in onset both protects individuals for
the intervening years, as well as predicts fewer lifetime
problems. Prevention programs aimed at those over the age
of 25, such as drug-free workplaces, perinatal education
programs for pregnant women, and well-baby clinics also
have contributed greatly to decreasing the percentage of
adults who use these substances.
Figure 8
Adult 3D-Day Use Prevention
Gains, 1979-1991
(Ages 26+)
600/0 ........................ ~-----,.
400/0 ........................ .
200/0 ......................... .
0% LiiiiiiiiiiL_
Illicit Drugs
Alcohol
Cigarettes
I- 1991 Rate 0 Prevented 1
Figure 8 presents the prevention gain data for adults. Since
the adult population is much larger than the other two age
groups (more than 150 million adults were in the 1991
population), the number of adult prevention beneficiaries is
very large.
In 1991 more than 3 million adults did not take illicit drugs
in any given month who might have if the 1979 use rate
Page 28
'.'.' ;.
had prevailed; 14 million adults did not use alcohol who
might have been expected to; and 14 million did not use
tobacco products who might have been expected to.
Population Subgroups Beneficiaries
Drug use patterns vary among different population sub-
groups. Drug use rates are higher for males than females in
all age groups, for all drugs, and within ethnic and regional
subgroups.32 Despite this disparity, prevention has worked
for both males and females; the decade-long use trends for
both sexes are down.33
The patterns are more complex for ethnic subgroups and
are not as amenable to generalizations. Usage patterns vary
by subgroup and drug. The National Household Survey
obtains relatively small samples of specific Hispanic
subgroups, American Indians, and AsianlPacific Islanders.
Other reports have presented Household Survey data for
some of these subgroups. In this study, we did not attempt
to do these various subanalyses because of data limitations.
Over the past decade, use rates went down for all popUla-
tions. They did not go down quite as much for African and
Hispanic Americans which is why we must target preven~
tion programs toward these populations.
Other Indicators of Success
Besides the decrease in use of alcohol, tobacco, and other
drugs, there are other indicators that prevention and treat-
ment are working. Alcohol-related traffic fatalities have
dropped from over 25,000 in 1982 to 17,700 in 1992, a
decrease of almost 30 percent.34 Prevention efforts have
been so successful that the HEALTHY PEOPLE 2000 objective
32 The National Household Survey divides the adult population into t "0
subgroups, those from 26 to 35 years of age and those older than 3=>. We
have combined these two adult groups in this paper so as to emphasize the
youth popUlation which in this paper are referred to as "adolescents" and
"young adults." Thus, the "adult" category refers to ages 26 and older.
NIDA, National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Main Findings 1991, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service.
33 Ibid.
34Press release, National Highway Traffic Administration, June 22, 1993.
Page 29
More high school
seniors are stopping
drug use than a
decade ago.
for decreasing alcohol-related traffic fatalities was achieved
by 1993. Other indicators of less harm associated with
alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs include:
The near disappearance of "Angel Dust" (PCP) as a
threat.
The non-emergence of nationwide heroin and metham-
phetamine epidemics.
The increased public awareness of the effects of alcohol
and tobacco on the fetus; and the public awareness of
the effects of passive smoke.
The greater awareness of the relationship between
alcohol and breast cancer among women, and the
association between alcohol and other drug use and
mY/AIDS.
The millions of Americans who have stopped smoking.
Another indicator of prevention's success is the reduction
of the per capita consumption of alcohol. In the decade
from 1980 to 1990, the death rate for chronic liver disease,
often associated with alcohol consumption, decreased by 23
percent; from 13.5 per 100,000 persons to 10.4. Reductions
occurred for women as well as men; African Americans as
well as Whites.35 Costly hospitalizations for chronic liver
disease dropped by almost 40 percent. Prevention and
treatment efforts are making a difference.
Non-Continuation Rates
One of the indicators of prevention success is a concept
called "non-continuation rates." It measures those individu-
als who are drug users and the percentage who stop using
the drug in a given year. This percentage has been calcu-
lated for high school seniors every year throughout the
decade from 1980 to 1990. The prevention, early interven-
tion, and treatment efforts are paying off.
3S"Deaths and Hospitalizations from Chronic Liver Disease and Cirrhosis -
United States, 1980-1989," MMWR, Vol. 41, Nos. 52 and 53, January 8,
1993.
Page 30
Table 2
High School Senior Drug Non-Continuation
Percentage Rates
(Seniors who used drug more than 10 times)
Drug
Gain %
Marijuana
5.4
12.3
128%
Inhalants
25.2
24.0
-5%
Hallucinogens
8.4
16.5
96%
Cocaine
3.1
19.6
532%
Barbiturates
11.7
19.8
69%
Tranquilizers
14.3
19.3
35%
Opiates
10.8
15.9
47%
Alcohol
1.9
138%
Table 2 provides these non-continuation rates for those
high school seniors who used a particular drug more than
10 times. This category includes alcohol- and drug-depen-
dent persons, but the vast majority of the youths have not
been using long enough to become dependent. The last
column of the table shows the percentage of improvement
in the non-continuation rates over the decade. Note that
twice as many seniors stopped using marijuana in 1990 as
had in 1980. Five times as many 1990 seniors stopped
using cocaine than 1980 seniors. Since these youths gener-
ally do not require treatment to stop use, we can see that
prevention efforts are working. Indeed, the only substance
that did not show dramatic improvement over the decade
was inhalants whose use rate was generally very low.36
Researchers attribute this change to many variables, but
particularly to the fact that high school seniors now per-
ceive greater risk associated with using drugs.
36Inhalants are more of a problem with younger children, and prevalence is
much higher in certain parts of the country than others, for example, in the
Southwest.
Page 31
Perception of Risk
Perception of risk
associated with using
drugs has increased,
leading to reduced use
of drugs.
Table 3 summarizes the percentage of high school seniors
perceiving "great risk" associated with drug use from 1980
to 1990. Perception of great risk increased substantially
among high school seniors in most drug usage categories.37
Changing perceptions of risk was one of the major objec-
tives of almost all public health ATOD problem prevention
programs ranging from those of the Center for Substance
Abuse Prevention to those of the Partnership for a Drug-
Free America.
Table 3
Percentage of High School Seniors Expressing
"Great Risk" of Drug Use
Drug Use
Try marijuana once or twice
10.0
23.1
Smoke marijuana occasionally
14.7
36.9
Smoke marijuana regularly
50.4
77.8
Try cocaine once or twice
31.3
59.4
Take cocaine regularly
69.2
91.1
Try amphetamines once or twice
29.7
32.2
Take amphetamines regularly
69.1
71.2
Try barbiturates once or twice
30.9
32.4
Take barbiturates regularly
72.2
70.2
Try one or two drinks (alcohol)
3.8
8.3
Take one or two drinks nearly every day
20.3
31.3
Take four or five drinks nearly every day
65.7
70.9
Have 5+ drinks once or twice each weekend
35.9
47.1
Smoke 1 or more packs of cigarettes per day
63.7
68.2
Gain %
131%
151%
54%
90%
32%
-3%
118%
54%
31%
37The only exceptions were LSD and regular use of barbiturates, both of which
have had extremely low usage prevalence and, as a result, were not the target
of most prevention programs. See L. D. Johnston et al., Drug Use Among
American High School Seniors, College Students and Young Adults, 1975-
1990, Volume II: College Students and Young Adults, National Institute on
Drug Abuse, 1991.
Page 32
-------------- ---
In addition, the changes in perception were not limited to
high school seniors. Similar changes in perception took
place among young adults.38 Other research methodologies
have conoborated this finding across different age group-
ings.39
Disapproval of Use
Increasing the accurate perception of risk is a classic health
prevention strategy, but we need more attitudinal change to
increase the number who disapprove of risky behavior. Has
prevention worked in this respect? Yes. Between 1980 and
1990, the proportiDn of high school seniors and young
adults who expressed disapproval of drug use increased.40,41
For example, the percentage of high school seniors express-
ing disapproval of occasional marijuana use went from 50
percent to 80 percent. Trying cocaine disapproval went
from 76 percent to 92 percent, and trying alcohol disap-
proval went from 16 percent to 29 percent.
Disapproval of smoking a pack a day, however, did not
increase as much-from 71 percent to only 73 percent. This
finding supports the earlier observation that smoking
prevention with adolescents is not making the same gains
as alcohol and other drug problem prevention.
These attitudinal gains conoborate the findings in reduced
use patterns. And, since attitudes are formed over time, we
need to remember that new age cohorts of children come
along each year. Just as these prevention gains are the
result of significant effort, they must be reapplied to each
new generation, as well as reinforced still further within
each generation.
38L, D. Johnston et al., Drug Use Among American High School Seniors,
College Students and Young Adults. 1975-1990, Volume II: College Students
and Young Adults, National Institute on Drug Abuse, 1991.
39Gordon S. Black Corporation, 1991 Partnership for a Drug-Free America
Survey.
4°Ibid., Volumes I and II.
41 Again LSD was a notable exception. However, the disapproval level for LSD
in 1980 was already very high-87 percent for once or twice and 97 percent
for regular use.
Page 33
Disapproval of drug
use is greater than
disapproval of
smoking.
High school seniors
know drug use is down.
Only half as many high
school seniors are
exposed to other
students using illicit
drugs as a decade ago.
Peer Norms
Another indicator that prevention works is the reported
perception of peer use of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs.
What percentage of youths believe that most of their
friends use drugs?
In 1980, 33 percent of the high school seniors believed
most of their friends used illicit drugs; 70 percent believed
most of their friends drank alcohol; and 23 percent believed
most of their friends smoked. By 1990, the percentage who
believed their friends used illicit drugs dropped to 12
percent; believed their friends drank alcoholic beverages
dropped to 61 percent; and believed their friends smoked
dropped to 21 percent.42 This is important because teens
attempt to be like their peers. They want to fit in. There-
fore, they may start or increase their use if they perceive
that non-use would make them "out of it." In other words,
we can use positive peer pressure by letting teens know that
most of their friends are not using drugs. These findings
are another indication that prevention works-most dra-
matically with illicit drugs, less so for alcohol, and on~y
slightly for tobacco.
Exposure to Drugs
Exposure is another indicator. Can a youngster go through
school and not be around others who use drugs?
In 1980, only 16 percent of the high school seniors reported
that they were never exposed to other young people delib-
erately using drugs. In 1990,32 percent reported not being
exposed to other students using drugs. 43
Age of First Use
From 1988 to 1991, age of first use for marijuana went up
slightly, but for use of alcohol and cigarettes the age of first
use has decreased.
42L. D. Johnston et aI., Drug Use Among American High School Seniors,
College Students and Young Adults, 1975-1990, National Institute on Drug
Abuse, 1991.
43Ibid.
Page 34
Table 4
Average Age of First use
Average age of first lise by
adolescents aged 12 through 17
Baseline
Target
Cigarettes
11.6
11.5
11.5
12.6
Alcohol
13.1
12.8
12.6
14.1
Marijuana
13.4
13.4
13.5
14.4
Dala Source: Nalional Household Survey of Drug Abuse. SAMHSA. OAS.
Rev. 4/7/93
One objective of many prevention programs is to delay first
use, since early use is a significant factor in developing
ATOD problems. According to a recent retrospective study
of illicit drug use for three specific drugs, the age of first
use has dropped since 1979.44 Examining the 1979-1989
period, the researchers found that age of first use for mari-
juana had been reduced from 19.0 years to 18.4 years; for
cocaine, from 22.3 years to 21.3; and for hallucinogens,
from 19.1 to 18.2 .
These findings show that with respect to the age of first
use, prevention has not worked very well. While we are
reducing use, children are using some drugs at an earlier
and earlier age. Prevention efforts need strengthening if we
are to reverse this trend of younger and younger drug use.
Corroborating Data
The 1992 National High School Senior Survey on Drug
Abuse data show that among high school seniors 3~-day
use of illicit drugs continued to decline.45 The 1991 rate of
illicit drug use was 16.4 percent, while the 1992 rate was
14.4 percent; reported as statistically significant.46 The
44SAMHSA. Risk Reduction Objectives for Healthy People 2000, April 7,
1993.
45 University of Michigan, National High School Senior Survey Press Release,
April 9, 1993.
46The level of significance was beyond .01.
Page 35
percent of 12th graders who drank alcohol decreased from
54.0 to 51.3 percent, also statistically significant.47 This
study, begun in 1991, measured whether the seniors had
"been drunk." In 1991,31.6 percent of the seniors reported
that they had been drunk. In 1992, the proportion was 29.9
percent. Cigarette smoking by 12th graders declined
slightly from 28.3 percent to 27.8 percent.
In spite of the declines among older students, eighth grad-
ers in 1992 reported higher rates of illicit drug use than did
eighth graders in 1991. Increases were reported in their use
of marijuana, cocaine, crack, LSD, other hallucinogens,
stimulants, and inhalants. Eighth graders showed some
modest but not statistically significant increases in alcohol
use.
In a sense, these results are a microcosm of the major
points of this study. Prevention has, and continues to, work
for some populations. But tremendous risks remain. One
out of seven seniors in high school, for example, continues
to take illicit drugs. Over half our Nation's seniors drink
illegally, and three out of every ten will engage in binge
drinking. Almost an equal number of seniors smoke ciga-
rettes. Drinking and smoking exposes them and others to a
multitude of health risks.
The picture for eighth graders raises this concern: As this
group enters their teen years, they will be at the vanguard
of a reversal of previously improving conditions. Indeed,
we face many prevention challenges for current and future
teenagers.48
SAMHSA has recently released the preliminary estimates
from the 1992 Household Survey. These results show the
continuing decreasing use trend herein described.49
47 The level of significance was beyond .05.
48 The challenge applies to all groups. In particular, the 1992 survey shows
some small increases among the very young (eighth graders). If this pattern
continues, there will be substantial backsliding by the time this cohort reaches
the 12th grade.
49 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Office of
Applied Studies, Preliminary Estimates from the 1992 National Household
Survey on Drug Abuse, 1993. (Excerpts available from NCADI)
Page 36
Are Prevention Gains Just the
Result of Natural Cycles?
Although there have been dramatic drug use changes in
our country's history, there have been no patterns of change
that would qualify as repetitive cycles. They have resulted
instead from specific forces. For example, in a single
decade, 1850-1860, the per capita alcohol consumption
increased from 1.6 gallons to 3.8 gallons. 50 This phenom-
enon never occurred again and did not establish a pattern of
use over time. German immigrants arriving in the St. Louis,
New York, and Milwaukee areas opened the first large-
scale, commercial beer breweries in America. They mar-
keted their product widely. The combination of increased
availability, effective marketing, and relative lack of pre-
vention efforts is believed to have contributed to an in-
crease in use rates.
Toward the end of the 19th century, cocaine use increased
dramatically because cocaine was vigorously marketed in a
variety of forms, including as a "wonder drug" with me-
dicinal qualities. Use decreased after the Harrison Act,
which controlled cocaine, was enforced.
The use of amphetamines increased in the 1950s due to
increased availability and declined in the late 1960s and
1970s as people came to understand that these "uppers"
were addictive and dangerous.
Throughout American history, availability and marketing
appear to have worked to increase use rates, while preven-
tion efforts have worked to decrease use patterns.
Another question often asked is whether use rates change
because of secular changes among groups over time, e.g.,
youth become more conservative. Researchers looked at
this across data on 17-year-old high school seniors and
found it to be only a minor factor in the cause of drug use
dropping, holding that perception of risk and (subsequent)
peer disapproval are chief reasons for the decreased use.51
30Babor, Alcohol Customs and Rituals, p. 53.
51 L. D. Johnston et al. Drug Use Among American High School Seniors and
Young Adults, 1975-1990, Volume I, High School Seniors, National Institute
on Drug Abuse, 1991.
PageS7
For every high school
senior who smoked
marijuana in a given
month, there were
seven others who did
not use marijuana,
although they said the
drug was readily
available.
Could the Decade's Prevention Gains Be the
Result of Interdiction?
This is not very likely. Interdiction is the process of cur-
tailing the supply of drugs-usually via law enforcement
methodologies. Interdiction efforts certainly help decrease
availability. However, young people reported that alcohol
and most other drugs were more readily and easily avail-
able at the end of the period (1990) than at the beginning
(1980).52 Prevention gains have taken place in an environ-
ment where alcohol and other drugs were more-not less-
readily available.
For example, when high school students and young adults
were asked how difficult it would be for them to obtain
different types of drugs, more of the 1990 seniors reported
that it was "fairly easy" or "very easy" to obtain cocaine,
heroin, and opiates than did their 1980 counterparts.
Slightly fewer reported easy availability for marijuana,
amphetamines, and barbiturates. Although youth believe
that getting marijuana is a little harder than in 1980, 84
percent of the 1990 high school seniors said that marijuana
is easy to obtain. However, less than 10 percent of this
same sample of high school seniors reported they would
use the readily available marijuana in any given month.
Where interdiction is contributing a great deal to prevention
is when youth perceive that the perception of risk includes
the chance of "being caught."
For every high school senior who smoked marijuana in a
given month, there were seven other seniors who did not
use, although they said the drug was readily available. A
similar situation prevails with alcohol and tobacco. A vail-
ability is widespread, even for minors. Decreasing avail-
ability, access to these substances, and driving down
demand are major components of prevention efforts.
S2 L. D. Johnston et ai., Drug Use Among American High School Seniors,
College Students and Young Adults, 1975-1990, National Institute on T)rug
Abuse, 1991.
Page 38
Why Does Prevention Become Harder
As It Succeeds?
Consider the person with many risk factors for developing
serious A TaD problems. The average time, cost, and effort
for prevention to succeed with this person will be much
greater than for someone with fewer risk factors. Most
researchers agree that the greater the number of risk factors
a person has, the more likely he or she is to develop an
ATOD problem. The goal of prevention is to reduce ATOD
problems by reducing individual, community, and societal
risk factors. In addition, the easiest gains come fIrst.
Figure 9 illustrates a classic diffusion model that describes
change in a typical population. At fIrst, a small percentage
of innovators initiate the change. Then, there is the larger
group, often called the "early" adopters. It is harder, takes
longer, and is generally more expensive to convert the
"late" adopters, and even moreso for the most resistant,
known as "laggards." Our prevention methodologies of the
last decade have succeeded with a substantial proportion of
the population. But those unreached individuals and com-
munities will need even more dramatic, persistent, innova-
tive, and intensive targeted efforts for prevention to suc-
ceed in the future .
Figure 9
Classic Diffusion Model53 Adopter Categorization of
the Basis of Time of Adoption
34%
34%
Early mojority
Lote mojority
Time of adoption of innovotions
53 Adapted from Everett M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, 3rd Edition, 1983.
Page 39
"cured," we would still have an enormous prevention task
because there are so many more users who are non-depen-
dent but who suffer from-and cause-these problems.
This is not to say, however, that there is no need for treat-
ment. Indeed, treatment makes an enormous contribu-
tion-both real and potential-for reducing ATOD prob-
lems. As the latest data show, this is particularly important
since there are fewer casual users but more heavy (depen-
dent) users. Unfortunately, there are still far too few
resources for treatment.
What Is the Annual National Expenditure for
Prevention?
It is difficult to measure exactly how much money the
Nation spends for prevention because the resources are
provided by both the public and private sectors and many
efforts involve volunteers or voluntary contributions. Even
when public sector financing is involved, funds flow from
Federal to State to local organizations.
While it is impossible to sort out Federal, State, and local
budgets precisely, we can make some estimates. The total
Federal expenditure in 1993 for what's known popularly as
the War on Drugs will be about $12.7 billion. 54 Most of this
money will fund interdiction efforts-so called "supply
reduction." Treatment and prevention will receive a smaller
portion. And prevention expenditures will be small com-
pared to treatment outlays.
A reasonable estimate of Federal expenditures for primary
prevention is about $2.5 billion.55
S40ffice of National Drug Control Policy, Presentation Graphics, February
1993.
sSEssentially, the Federal outlays include CSAP, the prevention activities of the
Department of Education, Department of Labor, CDC, NIAAA, NIDA, DEA,
Indian Health Service, and myriad other Federal prevention components. It
includes the estimate of 10 percent to 15 percent of SAMHSA block grants to
the States that are earmarked for primary prevention. It also includes the
NIAAA and NIDA efforts regarding prevention research. The AOD
prevention activities of most of the Federal agencies are not budgeted in
separate categories, and precise costs are not available. The $2.5 billion
figure is a rough but reasonable estimate.
Page 41
America spends about
$7.5 billion annually
for primary
prevention-about $30
for every man, woman,
and child.
Also, there are the outlays of State and local government, not
including the passthroughs of Federal funds. Ideally we will
want to contrast the prevention expenditure figure with the
costs of ATOD problems to society. Therefore, we include
voluntary contributions to primary prevention efforts. "In
kind" matching of State, Federal, and local grants, including
volunteer services, should be included as well.
There are organizations such as the National Council on
Alcohol and Drug Dependence, the National Association
for Native American Children of Alcoholics, National
Foundation for Children of Alcoholics, PRIDE, Mothers
Against Drunk Driving, and countless others. While these
organizations receive occasional Federal grants and con-
tracts, the bulk of their efforts is privately financed or
performed by volunteers. The Partnership for a Drug-Free
America, one of the most extensive private prevention
efforts, estimates that it receives $1 million a day in the
value of contributed advertising services and media time
and space for public service announcements.56
There is no sound scientific or economic way to measure
these private contributions. But, in discussions with many
leaders in the field, a reasonable estimate is that the States,
localities, and nonprofit organizations spend (or contribute
labor equivalents of) $2 for every $1 spent by the Federal
Government. Therefore, an estimate of the total national
expenditure for primary prevention of ATOD problems is
$7.5 billion. This totals approximately $30 for each man,
woman, and child in our population. Of that estimate the
average taxpayer cost for primary prevention is about $12.
If Prevention Is Working, Why Do ATOD Costs
Seem to Be Increasing?
Many factors cause ATOD costs to increase.
New Users as the Population Increases
While use is decreasing markedly, there are many more
new users of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs because the
56 Partnership for a Drug Free America, Fact Sheet, May 1993.
Page 42
population is increasing. In 1979, the U.S. popUlation was
225 million; in 1991 it was just under 253 million-a 12.4
percent increase. Growth in population generally means
growth in utilization of all services, health-related and
otherwise. In addition, the biggest use of alcohol, tobacco,
and other drugs occurs among young adults. As this group
ages, ATOD problems tend to emerge.
Lag Time and Benefit Schedules
Different prevention programs have different economic
benefit schedules. If we reduce the alcohol- and drug-
taking behavior of pregnant women, the economic benefit
will begin to occur within a year. There will be fewer birth
complications, fewer low-birth weight babies, and fewer
alcohol-affected children. In contrast, the benefits of a
successful preschool program will not begin to accrue to
the society for another decade. However, the benefit will
continue for years. Both the pregnant women and preschool
programs are needed; both will payoff; both will save
money. However, they will do so on different benefit
schedules and meanwhile they must compete for resources.
What More Needs to Be Done?
The dramatic success of the Nation's alcohol, tobacco, and
other drug problem prevention efforts could be easily
misinterpreted. We cannot conclude that the problem is
solved, and that additional prevention efforts are not
needed. Millions of Americans are still at risk because they
use alcohol, tobacco, or other drugs, and some are drug
dependent. Table 5 shows the number still at risk for illicit
drugs, alcohol, and cigarettes.
Page 43
Population increases
tend to increase the
number of ATOD
problems.
Some prevention
programs pay offfaster
than others.
The number of
adolescents still at risk
for ATOD problems is
almost twice the
number of youth who
will graduate from
high school this year.
Table 5
Americans Still at Risk (millions)
Young
Adolescents
Adults
Adults
Total
Illicit Drugs
1.4
4.4
6.9
12.7
Alcohol
4.1
18.1
81.0
103.2
Cigarettes
2.2
9.2
43.5
54.9
The numbers in each category are not independent. Many,
indeed most, of the 12.7 million Americans at risk for illicit
drugs also are drinkers, and many also use tobacco.
Among adolescents, over 1 million use illicit drugs in any
given month; over 4 million illegally drink alcohol; and
almost 2 million smoke cigarettes. As with the general
population, there is much overlap. It is not easy to estimate
the adolescents at risk for anyone or more of the drug
categories. However, we know that the number is over 4
million-almost twice the number of adolescents who will
graduate from high school this year. 57 And, as reported
earlier, in spite of the declines among older students, eighth
graders in 1992 reported higher rates of illicit drug use than
did eighth graders in 1991.
These 4 million plus adolescents must be targeted for
current and future alcohol, tobacco, and other drug preven-
tion efforts. If we do not maintain a national prevention
effort, we could have a relapse. Our success could be
undone in a few short years. The Nation's investment in
prevention would be lost; no dividends would be paid.
Despite our accomplishments, we still have an enormous
prevention job ahead of us. We need to move forward and
build on the momentum of our success.
572,193,000 high school graduates are projected for 1992. U.S. National Center
for Education Statistics, Projections of Education Statistics to 2002, U.S.
Department of Education.
Page 44
The prevention of ATOD problems is working. Far more
needs to be done, especially among those with numerous
risk factors. The Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
welcomes your involvement to sustain and enhance the
Nation's prevention progress toward the HEALTHY PEOPLE
2000 objectives.
To assist those who want to help prevent alcohol, tobacco,
and other drug (ATOD) problems, the following materials
are available from CSAP's National Clearinghouse for
Alcohol and Drug Information (NCADI):
What You Can Do About Drug Use in America
(#PHD587)
Turning Awareness Into Action: What Your Commu-
nity Can Do About Drug Use in America (#PHD519)
Signs of Effectiveness: The CSAP High Risk Youth
Demonstration Grant Program (#PHD612)
Prevention Plus II: Tools for Creating and Sustaining a
Drug-Free Community (#BK159)
Prevention Plus ill: Assessing Alcohol and Other Drug
Prevention Programs at the School and Community
Level (#BK188)
Prevention Primer: An Encyclopedia of Alcohol and
Other Drug Prevention Issues
ATOD Resource Guides on the following topics:
Prevention Resource Guide: Pregnant/Postpartum
Women and Their Infants (#MS420)
Prevention Resource Guide: Older Americans
(#MS443)
Prevention Resource Guide: Youth in Low-Income
Urban Environments (#MS446)
Prevention Resource Guide: Prevention in the Work-
place (#MS453)
Prevention Resource Guide: College Youth (#MS418)
Page 45
You may also want to subscribe to Prevention Pipeline by
contacting NCADI.
National Clearinghouse
for Alcohol and Drug Information
P.O. Box 2345
Rockville, MD 20847
1-800-729-6686
TDD 1-800-487-4889
For procedures to request technical assistance or training,
write to:
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
Rockwall II, 9th Floor
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
Page 46
APPENDIX
Limitations of the Prevalence Data and Analysis
The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, upon
which much of this analysis is based, has certain limitations
important in the conclusions and implications of the results
herein. These limitations lie in the fact that the Household
Survey is just that-a survey of households. It was never
intended to be a survey of the homeless, of prison inmates,
or of people otherwise institutionalized. And, surveys of
households typically undercount and underrepresent par-
ticular subpopulations, such as recent immigrants, illegal
residents, or those who are not sure of their legal status.
These people tend to avoid surveys.
Anecdotal evidence and reports suggest that these
underrepresented populations probably have not been
proportional beneficiaries of the Nation's alcohol, tobacco,
and other drug prevention efforts. Indeed, in some cases
they have been impervious to them. Recent initiatives have
targeted these undercounted populations; however, such
programs are too new to have a substantial impact.
Further, the Household Survey depends on self reporting,
and some critics question the validity of any method where
admission of illegal activity is implicit in affirmative
answers. Our analysis involves trends; therefore, any error
of underreporting would not invalidate the decreasing trend
finding since the same potential problem operates each year
of the survey.
Theoretically, the 1979-1991 changes for each of the age
groups could be random sampling errors and not represent
real reductions in use. The generally constant direction of
the data and the 12-year difference magnitudes relative to
the standard errors make this possibility unlikely.58,59
s8Calculating the probabilities is mathematically possible. However, we leave
others to pursue this line of analysis.
s9There is a theoretical possibility that some part of the decrease can be
attributt!d to a statistical phenomenon called "regression to the mean."
However, it is very unlikely that this phenomenon could explain the large
decrease in prevalence, especially given the monotonic decreasing nature of
the trend.
Page 47
Prevention success
apparent in today' s
young adults is largely
due to the prevention
efforts with adolescents
of yesterday.
There is no guarantee that the prevention successes of the
past will continue in the future for the same age groups.
Over the 12-year period of the data, individuals moved
from one category to another as they aged. In part, the
prevention success apparent in today's young adults is due
to the prevention efforts with adolescents of yesterday. The
prevention gains made today with youth may evaporate
as they age if there is no consistent and continuous
prevention effort throughout the society. Measles and
tuberculosis, for example, recurred because prevention
efforts decreased.
As a partial check on the approach taken herein, we made a
similar use rate analysis using data from a different survey,
the National High School Senior Survey.ISO We observed
similar ranges of prevalence decrease.
However, it could be argued that the National High School
Senior Survey, by definition, underrepresents the poor and
some ethnic/racial populations where the school dropout
rates are larger. Many of these populations cannot be
surveyed because they do not attend school.
Also, we could have chosen a different. time period for this
analysis. We might have started in 1983 instead of 1979. If
we had done so, all the individual numbers such as average
yearly reduction would change, but the basic thrust-that
30-day prevalence has gone down-that prevention
works-would not be altered.
For full copies of the National Household Survey 1991 data
used in this paper or the preliminary results of the 1992
data, call CSAP's National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and
Drug Information at 1-800-729-6686.
6OL. D. Johnston et aI., Drug Use Among American High School Seniors,
College Students and Young Adults, 1975-1991, National Institute on Drug
Abuse, 1992.
Page 48
·U.S. Government Printing Offlco: 1993 -
715·025188026