© 2019 Annals of Indian Psychiatry | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow
Adolescence is a transition phase from childhood to
adulthood, which is marked by several biological, cognitive,
and psychosocial changes. The characteristics which emerge
during adolescence involve: a tendency to experiment and
seek novel experiences, a heightened sense of vulnerability,
a low risk perception, an intense desire for independence,
and an inner search for self‑identity which gradually shape
up their personality throughout the developing years. It is a
critical period characterized by neurobiological and physical
maturation leading to enhanced psychological awareness and
higher level of social and emotional interactions with peers and
adults. From neurobiological perspective also adolescents can
be viewed as “works in progress,” with academic, interpersonal,
and emotional challenges, and exploring new territories using
one hand, it is a phase of tremendous growth in preparation
of adults’ roles and skills to sustain pressures and challenges,
whereas on the other, it is transition phase that can increase risk
of various psychological disorders, adjustment problems, and
Worldwide, it is estimated that 10%–20% of adolescents’
experience mental health conditions, yet the majority of times,
mental health are overlooked for several reasons, such as a
lack of knowledge or awareness of mental health among health
According to the 2011 census, around one‑fourth of the Indian
population is adolescent (253 million).[5,6] As per the National
Mental Health Survey of India (2015–2016), the prevalence
of psychiatric disorders among adolescents (13–17 years) is
to the mental health issues of this age group.
Dimensions of Mental Health Problems
The prevalence and pattern of mental and behavioral disorders
show a change during adolescence. The mental health need of
this population group is distinct from both children and adults.
Nearly 50% of adult psychiatric disorders begin before the age of
act as predisposing or precipitating factor for mental illness during
the adolescent period. These impairing psychiatric disorders
Major Psychiatric Disorders in Adolescence
Depressive disorders become more prevalent, behavioral
disturbances, such as suicidality, eating disorders, and
substance abuse, begin to emerge in these years. The
prevalence rates increase from 1% to 2% in childhood to
Depression and stress are more prevalent among school‑going
adolescent girls. Approximately 40%–90% of adolescents
with depression have a comorbid psychiatric disorder such
as anxiety disorders, conduct disorders, substance abuse,
and personality disorders in the case of adolescents.[8,9]
Anxiety disorders are also commonly encountered among the
of death among young people as 25% of deaths in adolescent
boys and 50%–75% of deaths in adolescent girls is due to
suicide. Every hour, one student commits suicide in India,
according to the National Crime Records Bureau report in
are prevalent substances of abuse among Indian adolescents.
The experimentation with “gateway” drugs such as tobacco,
alcohol, and inhalants may lead to indulgence in high‑risk
behaviors. The substance use has spread to different areas of
the world, including India and increasing in adolescents’ age
groups even in the distant regions. In this issue, Majumder
in adolescent patients and school‑going adolescents in
North‑Eastern India. Majumder et al. have assessed psychiatric
morbidity in 474 consecutive adolescent patients (10–19 years)
attending to psychiatric services at tertiary care center in
Manipur and reported the most common disorder as neurotic,
stress‑related, and somatoform disorders (41%), followed
by psychotropic substance use disorders (21%) (including
opioid dependence in 14% and cannabis dependence in
substance use disorders (37%) in adolescent boys, and neurotic,
stress‑related, and somatoform disorders (61%) in adolescent
702 school‑going adolescents (13–19 years) in Kohima and
reported emotional problems in 17%, hyperactivity in 16%,
Another issue which needs focus and active intervention is
sexual abuse which has long been the subject of the study in
the field of mental and social health. Nearly one‑third of higher
secondary school‑going adolescents reported experiencing
some form of sexual abuse over the past 12 months and 6%
media are ubiquitous among adolescents and serve as platforms
to socialize and to communicate. The “digital revolution” has
highlighted the adaptive nature of the adolescent brain in its
ability to incorporate these technologies. Reports had also
indicated that about 90% of adolescents use the Internet in
many ways, including messaging, blogging, posting photos,
Adolescent Mental Health: Issues, Challenges, and Solutions
Nebhinani and Jain: Adolescent mental health
Annals of Indian Psychiatry  ¦  Volume 3  ¦  Issue 1  ¦  January-June 2019
for adolescents include increased communication, increased
access to academic information, and familiarity with social
and cultural habits of people worldwide. On the other side,
pathological Internet use/Internet addiction is reported
high in Indian schools (prevalence of 11.8%) and college
settings (prevalence of 42.9%). The consequences of these
are manifold ranging from alteration of biological functions,
Factors Affecting the Psychological Health of
There is a complex biopsychosocial framework of risk factors
operating in the lives of adolescents which include self, home,
school, peer group, and neighborhood which may be associated
with the mental health disorder.[1,8] Risk factors include all
variables that increase the probability that a given child or
adolescent will develop psychopathology while protective
factors decrease the risk of developing psychopathology.
Rarely, a single‑risk‑factor accounts for the emergence and
inhibition of a psychiatric disorder.[1,12] There is a significant
effect of the following factors on the mental health of
adolescents: recent sociocultural changes, poor social support,
the breakdown of extended and joint families, the ambiguity
of societal values, and increasing gap between aspirations and
possible achievements, substance abuse, etc.[5,12,13]
Barriers in the Service Delivery
Stigma about mental health and lack of education and
awareness forms one of the factors for seeking psychiatric
consultation. Above that beliefs about mental illnesses
influence help‑seeking attitudes and patterns in people. In
India, only one‑third of the families (37.5%) of children and
adolescents with mental disorders perceived that their children
limitations of the existing policies and programs, the lack of
alignment across them and the fragmentation of governance of
adolescent mental health between ministries and departments,
are likely to pose major barriers to their effective and efficient
Interventions for Psychiatric Disorders in
There is a need for a special emphasis on adolescent mental
health at different levels with coordinated efforts. To strengthen
child and adolescent mental health care in a country, it
should be supported by the necessary policies, programs,
legislation, policy, budget, primary‑care system, training
address psychiatric disorders in youth are universal, targeted,
prevention, are received by all children and families within
a specific geographical distribution. There is potential scope
for primary or preventive interventions at this age. Targeted
interventions are designed for children at increased risk for
treatment to adolescent with psychiatric disorder which
includes psychosocial, psychopharmacological, and other
environmental interventions.[17,18] Preventive efforts not
only improve the mental health of young but also may have
far‑reaching consequences in reducing adult psychiatric
Role of Parents and Teachers
Schools and colleges may play a vital role in the development
of adolescents and provide a room and scope for intervention.
Family as an institution continues to play a large role in
influencing adolescents across all sections of the society
in India. Parental support and healthy parenting have been
identified as contributors to better mental health outcomes
Sensitization and training of teachers and counselors to handle
adolescent mental health issues can further help in early
identification of mental health problems. Drug awareness
campaigns should be regularly conducted in schools and
colleges with the facility of screening in the high‑risk
skills to resist peer pressure and the ability to say “no” to
drugs. Special attention should be devoted to children with
scholastic difficulties or poor academic achievements with
an encouraging and supportive approach. Resilience‑focused
interventions such as capacity building strategies, and coping
skills may be designed to enhance resilience thereby positively
education” pertaining to adolescent health, sex education,
and pubertal changes have shown improvement in knowledge
approaches such as mental health promotion such as yoga,
life skills approach in secondary schools has shown significant
results and can be further strengthened.[22‑24]
Collaborative Role of Health Professionals
Skilled and competent workforce is need of the hour, especially
in dealing with adolescent mental health at various levels.
Professionals such as physicians, pediatricians, and nurses can be
trained in relevant aspects of adolescent mental health promotion
and preventive activities. The key to good liaison is the better
understanding of respective roles and responsibilities by each
effective linkages along with adequate referral system may further
help in management of priority mental health disorders in children
and adolescents and dealing with emergency conditions like
suicide. There is also a need to build on indigenous ways of child
and adolescent health promotion. Computer‑assisted interventions
and programs need to be better aligned with evidence‑based
practices emerging from both scientific studies and experience
with the regular update of practice guidelines will further help in
Nebhinani and Jain: Adolescent mental health
Annals of Indian Psychiatry  ¦  Volume 3  ¦  Issue 1  ¦  January-June 2019
Need for Effective Inter‑Sectoral Linkages and
There is a need to develop effective inter‑sectoral linkages
comprising the educational, legal and juvenile justice
system, social welfare, and voluntary organizations and
nongovernmental organizations with more effective linkage
of adolescent mental health with the national programs such
as National Rural Health Mission and the Reproductive and
Seeing the huge‑dimensional problem development of
community and primary health can be a feasible, acceptable,
and affordable approach for catering to the mental health needs
of Indian children.[26,27] This may be achieved through mobile
health camps, regular screening and health check‑ups like other
medical morbidities at primary levels with the involvement
of Anganwadi workers or primary care clinics under district
at center and state levels to have an effective mechanism
for coordination and monitoring of services to facilitate an
effective liaison with different organizations on adolescent
To conclude, child and adolescent mental health is a shared
responsibility. For any interventions to be effective, there is a
need for synergy between different stakeholders. Adolescents
having mental health problems and disorders, need to have
access to timely, integrated, high‑quality, multi‑disciplinary
mental health services to ensure effective assessment,
treatment, and support. The preservation and promotion of
mental health in the young population have conventionally
been viewed as an individual or family responsibility; however,
it is important to emphasize it at a much broader level. There
is a need to promote the concept of positive health with public
health approaches including expansion of the community
services for mental disorders.[3,12] There is an urgent need to
explore newer models of service delivery apart from standard
models of hospital‑based care. The newer service delivery
models should incorporate cross‑cultural, multilingual, and
multiregional requirements. A positive step in this direction
could be the formulation of mental health policy specifically for
the younger population to provide a developmental framework
to enhance adolescent mental health.
Naresh Nebhinani, Shreyance Jain
Department of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical Science, Jodhpur,
Address for correspondence: Dr. Naresh Nebhinani,
Department of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical Science,
Jodhpur ‑ 342 005, Rajasthan, India.
1.	 Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. Kaplan and Sadock’s Comprehensive
Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
2.	 Nebhinani  N. Editorial role of connectedness in youth suicide
prevention. J Indian Assoc Child Adolesc Ment Health 2018;14:4‑9.
3.	 Sagar R. Child and adolescent mental health: Need for a public health
approach. J Ment Health Hum Behav 2011;16:1‑4.
4.	 World Health Organization. Adolescent Mental Health. World Health
5.	 Majumder U, Gojendra S, Heramani N, Singh R. A study of psychiatric
morbidity and substance use pattern among the adolescents attending
department of psychiatry of a tertiary hospital in Northeastern India.
Ann Indian Psychiatry 2019;3:19-22.
6.	 Keyho  K, Gujar  NM, Ali  A. Prevalence of mental health status in
adolescent school children of Kohima district, Nagaland. Ann Indian
7.	 Murthy RS. National mental health survey of India 2015‑2016. Indian J
8.	 Malhotra  S, Chakrabarti  S, editors. Developments in Psychiatry in
India. New Delhi: Springer India; 2015.
9.	 Pattanayak  RD, Mehta  M. Childhood and adolescent depression. In:
Nayar U, editor. International Handbook on Mental Health of Children
and Adolescents: Culture, Policy and Practices. New  Delhi: Sage
Publications; 2012. p. 21‑38.
10.	 Deb S, Chatterjee P, Walsh KM. Anxiety among high school students
in India : Comparisons across gender, school type, social strata, and
perceptions of quality time with parents. Aust J Educ Dev Psychol
11.	 Nebhinani N, Kuppili PP. Editorial pathological internet use in children
and adolescents: Problem statement and preventive strategies. J Indian
Assoc Child Adolesc Ment Health 2018;14:1‑8.
12.	 Sagar  R, Krishnan  V. Preventive strategies in child and adolescent
psychiatry. Indian J Soc Psychiatry 2017;33:118.
13.	 Patel  V, Flisher  AJ, Nikapota  A, Malhotra  S. Promoting child and
adolescent mental health in low and middle income countries. J Child
14.	 Srinath  S, Girimaji  SC, Gururaj  G, Seshadri  S, Subbakrishna  DK,
Bhola P, et al. Epidemiological study of child and adolescent psychiatric
disorders in urban and rural areas of Bangalore, India. Indian J Med Res
15.	 Roy  K, Shinde  S, Sarkar  BK, Malik  K, Parikh  R, Patel  V. India’s
response to adolescent mental health: A policy review and stakeholder
analysis. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2019;54:405‑14.
16.	 Russell  PS, Mammen  P, Nair  MK, Russell  S, Shankar  SR. Priority
mental health disorders of children and adolescents in primary‑care
pediatric setting in India 1: Developing a child and adolescent
mental health policy, program, and service model. Indian J Pediatr
17.	 Patton G. An epidemiological case for a separate adolescent psychiatry?
Aust N Z J Psychiatry 1996;30:563‑6.
18.	 Patton G. Adolescent psychiatry: Its potential to reduce the burden of
mental disorder. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 1998;248:1‑3.
19.	 Maiuolo  M, Deane  FP, Ciarrochi  J. Parental authoritativeness, social
support and help‑seeking for mental health problems in adolescents. J Youth
20.	 Nebhinani N, Jain S. Editorial Resilience in childhood psychopathology:
The changing paradigm. J. Indian Assoc Child Adolesc Ment Health
21.	 Das  P, Pal  R, Pal  S. Awareness on psychosomatic health among
adolescent girls of three schools in North Kolkata. Indian J Psychiatry
22.	 Kapur  M. Mental Health in Indian Schools. New  Delhi: Sage
23.	 Hagen I, Nayar US. Yoga for children and young people’s mental health
and well‑being: Research review and reflections on the mental health
potentials of yoga. Front Psychiatry 2014;5:35.
24.	 Srikala  B, Kishore  KK. Empowering adolescents with life skills
education in schools  –School mental health program: Does it work?
Indian J Psychiatry 2010;52:344‑9.
25.	 Singh  OP. Increasing core competencies in child and adolescent
psychiatry. Indian J Psychiatry 2019;61:151‑2.
26.	 Saxena S, Thornicroft G, Knapp M, Whiteford H. Resources for mental
Nebhinani and Jain: Adolescent mental health
Annals of Indian Psychiatry  ¦  Volume 3  ¦  Issue 1  ¦  January-June 2019
health: Scarcity, inequity, and inefficiency. Lancet 2007;370:878‑89.
27.	 Saxena S, Paraje G, Sharan P, Karam G, Sadana R. The 10/90 divide in
mental health research: Trends over a 10‑year period. Br J Psychiatry
Access this article online
This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 License, which allows others to
remix, tweak, and build upon the work non-commercially, as long as appropriate credit
is given and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.
How to cite this article: Nebhinani N, Jain S. Adolescent mental health:
Issues, challenges, and solutions. Ann Indian Psychiatry 2019;3:4-7.