WOMEN’S, CHILDREN’S AND ADOLESCENTS’ HEALTH
Every adolescent has a right to mental health. Promotion and protection of mental health can
improve quality of life, strengthen human capital, contribute to socioeconomic development and lead
to a more equitable world.(1) Although investment in early, effective intervention for the mental
health of young people was identified as a “best buy” over a decade ago, current evidence suggests
that adolescent mental health remains a neglected yet pressing issue.(2,3) The burden of suboptimal
mental health is enormous both during adolescence and into adulthood, and it also influences the
next generation.(4,5) This knowledge summary calls for increased attention to and action on
adolescent mental health, where everyone has a role to play.
Why should we pay attention to adolescent mental health?
Mental health conditions, such as depression and anxiety, account for 16% of the global burden of disease
and injury (measured by DALYs*) among the world’s 1.2 billion adolescents (aged 10-19 years).(4,6,7) It is
estimated that 10 to 20% of adolescents experience mental health conditions, and a significant number of
others experience symptoms that have a negative effect on their well-being.(8) Poor adolescent mental health
is also associated with higher risk of injuries and substance use, affecting the quality and length of life.(9)
Particularly vulnerable adolescents include those living with disabilities or chronic illnesses (e.g. HIV), those
who are stigmatized and marginalized because of sexual orientation, gender identity or ethnicity, and those
exposed to violence, living in poverty or in humanitarian, fragile and vulnerable settings.(9)
* Disability adjusted life years (DALYs) is the number of years lost due to ill-health, disability or early death.
Hosted by the World Health Organization
Many mental health conditions commonly emerge during adolescence.
Globally, anxiety and depression are among the leading causes of illness
and disability among adolescents, with higher rates among adolescent
girls.(4,9) At worst, depression and other mental health conditions can
lead to self-harm and suicide.(10) Most recent statistics show that in
2016 over 60,000 adolescent deaths were due to suicide.(7) Overall,
the great majority of suicide deaths among adolescents occur in low-
and middle-income countries.(4) Suicide was in the top five causes of
adolescent deaths in high-income countries and in low- and middle-
income countries in four of the six regions of the World Health
As well as having a direct impact on adolescents, the consequences of
poor adolescent mental health extend to adulthood, impairing both
physical and mental health, and limiting social and economic
opportunities to live fulfilling lives.(4,11) The onset of 50% of adult
mental health conditions starts in the mid-teens, with 75% occurring by
the mid-20s.(12) Steps must be taken to enhance adolescents’ social
and emotional skills and to promote enabling and nurturing environments
in families, schools and communities. It is also crucial to recognize and
mitigate mental health issues early, and identify risk factors for future
mental illness – including violence, neglect, abuse, school drop-out,
poverty and parental mental illness.(13)
Why is there underinvestment in adolescent
mental health throughout the world?
Although the overall burden of disease is lowest in young adolescents
(aged 10-14 years), such data mask the importance of risk factors that
are adopted or consolidated during adolescence but have their health
impacts later in life.(9) Taken together with the relative lack of public
health attention to mental health, adolescent mental health has not
received the investment that it deserves, despite its enormous
economic, social and personal burden. It has attracted little political
interest and limited funding in all income settings.(14) For example, in a
sample of 132 low- and middle-income countries representing recipients
of US$ 24 billion (66%) of total Development Assistance for Health,
spending on targeted assistance for young people aged 10-24 years
was 2.2%, or US$ 528 million. Of this, adolescent mental health,
specifically depressive disorders and self-harm, was allocated around
US$ 6 million (1.2%) – a miniscule amount compared to its
contribution to the adolescent health burden.(15) Mental health has
seen little financial and technical investment over the last decades.(5)
This inaction stems in part from the lack of knowledge about the
cost-effectiveness of interventions, especially in low- and middle-
Many countries are not well-prepared to deal with this “invisible”,
stigmatized and often-ignored challenge. Mental health services as a
whole, and for children and young people specifically, have long been
neglected.(13) Young people aged 10-24 years have the lowest rate of
health care coverage of any age group,(5) and evidence suggests that
the majority of adolescents and young adults with mental health
conditions do not receive care and treatment from health and other
professionals.(5) Lack of awareness of the benefits of receiving care,
prejudice associated with mental illness and privacy concerns are
among the factors preventing adolescents from seeking help.(4,9,14,17)
Cost and geographical location of services are also barriers to access.
In addition, many adolescents are reliant on adults to recognize if there
is a problem and facilitate their access to care.(18)
When adolescents do seek help, the care and services they require are
often either not available or not responsive to their needs and of poor
quality.(13) The consequences are that adolescent mental health
and developmental gains that have been made in young childhood may
be lost, especially in contexts of chronic adversity, including
humanitarian settings.(19) This in turn can have lifelong health and
What do we know about addressing adolescent
The significance of adolescent mental health conditions across the life
course has become clear in the past few decades.(4,5,9,21) There is
also growing support to move mental health from the periphery to the
centre of health and development agendas.(22) This has been supported
by key initiatives to raise the profile of mental health, including the
WHO-led Mental Health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP),(23) the joint
WHO/UNICEF Helping Adolescents Thrive initiative,(24) the 2016
Lancet Commission on Adolescent Health and Well-Being(5) and the
2018 Lancet Commission on Global Mental Health and Sustainable
We have enough knowledge for action on adolescent mental health.
We also know that mental health promotion and the prevention of
mental health conditions, self-harm and risky behaviours are key to
helping adolescents thrive.(26) There is a growing evidence base on
interventions to care for and treat mental health conditions. A range of
multisectoral strategies and programmes have been shown to have
positive returns (Table 1, Box 1 and Box 2). However, more research is
needed on this neglected area of adolescent health and well-being, to
strengthen measurement (27,28), improve existing interventions and to
design new scalable intervention packages for mental health promotion,
prevention and care in adolescents.
Photo: Flickr Creative Commons License/World Bank/Dominic Chavez
New Zealand takes steps to address high rates of
New Zealand has one of the highest rates of adolescent suicide
in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) countries. In 2018, a government inquiry into mental
health and addiction identified a variety of innovative well-being
initiatives in schools relating to areas such as bullying
prevention, healthy relationships, well-being and resilience (16).
For example, Kāhui Ako – Communities of Learning –groups of
education and training providers (early learning, schools,
Maori immersion schools, and post-secondary) - are providing
new opportunities for different stakeholders across sectors to
work together. The inquiry found that several Communities of
Learning have negotiated to have staff from the Child and
Adolescent Mental Health Service placed within schools as
part of a three-year pilot.(17) As of May 2019 there were
221 Communities of Learning across New Zealand, comprising
1,799 schools, 1,100 early learning services, 11 tertiary providers
and reaching over 663,000 children and young people.(33)
Shared measurement systems and review processes across
Communities of Learning are still developing.
Reducing alcohol-related harms in South Africa
Alcohol is one of the leading risk factors for death and disability
in South Africa. The Western Cape Government aims to change
this by focusing on interventions that make a tangible impact on
reducing the harms related to alcohol. Since 2016, the Western
Cape Government has initiated several GameChanger
programmes in three areas in the province, including the
Alcohol Harm Reduction GameChanger. Strategies have been
implemented to reduce access to alcohol, such as closing down
illegal alcohol outlets, installing surveillance cameras and
increasing law enforcement presence. The programme also
provides recreational and economic alternatives for young
people by supporting an existing youth hiphop programme
called Nyanga Yethu and establishing an I-Can Play digital
gaming centre which is open 24 hours a day. A community
evaluation conducted in 2018 showed that close to 75% of
those surveyed felt their community was a better and safer
place to live than the previous year.(34)
Examples of multisectoral strategies and interventions
for adolescent mental health
•	Psychosocial support, interventions and services for
adolescent mental health and well-being including:
-	formal avenues for treatment such as psychotherapy/
pharmacotherapy and emotional and behavioural
-	other strategies and interventions such as peer support,
crisis counselling, and community referral pathways
•	Individual and group interventions for the promotion of
mental health and prevention of mental health conditions,
self-harm and other risk behaviours, such as those focused
on interpersonal skills, emotion regulation, problem-solving
skills, stress management and alcohol and drug
•	Detection and management of hazardous and harmful
alcohol and drug use
•	Management of self-harm and suicide risks
•	Care for children and adolescents with developmental delays
•	Responsive caregiving and stimulation for promoting
positive, stable emotional connections between parents
and adolescents, and establishing appropriate structures
and boundaries with adolescents
•	Caregiver skills and communication training for parents and
caregivers, including for managing behavioural, emotional
and developmental conditions in adolescents
•	Promotion of adolescent mental health awareness, literacy
and demand creation for mental health services with
services available to meet the demand stimulated by
•	Community interventions for mental health and the
prevention of adolescent suicide, substance abuse and
•	School-based interventions for prevention of emotional
disorders and adolescent suicide, substance abuse and
self-harm, including life skills education
•	Policies to promote enabling and nurturing environments
for optimal mental health
•	Adolescent mental health and psychosocial support,
counselling, care and treatment and related services for
adolescent mental health and well-being
•	Integrating mental health into primary health care and
training for health care providers
•	Structural, environmental and organizational interventions to:
-	address social determinants of mental health, including
restrictive and harmful gender and social norms
-	 prevent adolescent suicide, substance abuse and self-harm
-	 eliminate stigma associated with mental health conditions
Photo: Flickr Creative Commons License/Feed My Starving Children (FMSC)
What actions are needed?
It is vital to ensure that policies and programmes prioritize evidence-
based adolescent mental health interventions and identify the best ways
to meet the specific needs of adolescents. This is essential for enabling
adolescents to survive and thrive and ensuring that no one is left behind.
Collective efforts by all stakeholders will be key.
We must work together and do the following:
•	Put adolescent mental health on the agenda. Strong leadership is
needed to make mental health a priority. This includes commitment to
innovative and quality services, and the strengthening of community
services. We must give more attention to the promotion of mental
health and the prevention, treatment and care of mental health
conditions in adolescents at the local, national and international levels,
including in humanitarian and fragile settings. Strengthening the
measurement of adolescent mental health is critical.
•	 Invest in adolescent mental health. Additional resources from domestic
health and development assistance budgets should be allocated to:
a) implementing and scaling up evidence-based prevention (see Table 1)
and early intervention programmes; b) strengthening overall care,
treatment and follow up of mental health conditions as part of
universal health coverage; and c) enabling adolescents to access
adolescent-responsive care, treatment and support.
•	Make adolescent mental health policy and programme design
processes in countries inclusive and transparent. It is important to
involve diverse stakeholders including adolescents and to create
meaningful opportunities for adolescent end users to engage and
participate. Together with other stakeholders such as researchers/
academics, and special interest groups including patients and their
families, adolescents should be valued partners in decision-making
processes, from agenda setting to implementation design and evaluation.
Responsive systems and services
•	Integrate mental health care promotion, prevention and treatment
programmes into existing programming, in schools, community
programmes/organizations and in health care systems - especially
at the primary health care level. This is particularly important for
vulnerable groups such as pregnant adolescents, adolescents with
disabilities or chronic conditions, adolescents in humanitarian and
fragile settings and those who are marginalized because of sexual
orientation, gender identity or ethnicity. Adolescents as well as family
members need support and training to learn the skills they need to
improve and protect mental health.
•	Foster coordinated multisectoral collaboration. Multisectoral
interventions are needed to address many of the determinants of
adolescent mental health that lie outside of the health sector, such as
socioeconomic problems, violence, lack of education and negative gender
norms. It requires an unprecedented degree of coordination across
sectors from the global to the local level. This includes establishing
linkages and referral mechanisms between sectors and levels.
•	Invest in research on innovative mental health services and
strengthen health data systems. Implementation research on mental
health services is needed to improve access, continuity, quality,
equity, efficiency and value, and to bring effective strategies to scale.
Data collection systems need to include indicators to monitor
adolescent mental health, adolescent vulnerabilities and risks, and
service access. Data must be disaggregated by equity stratifiers,
including sex, age, geographic location and country specific factors.
•	Build human and technical capacity for adolescent mental health,
and for addressing the stigma associated with mental health. This
includes training teachers, community and social workers, and health
workers in adolescent development and engagement, as well as
health practitioner pre- and in-service training for routine assessment
of mental health conditions, care and treatment. Country-level
technical capacity will also be needed for policy and programme
implementation, monitoring, evaluation and research.
•	Draw on a less specialized workforce. In most countries, task
shifting will be essential – the majority of mental health services will
need to be provided by people without specialist training in mental
health, such as lay mental health workers, nurses, teachers and
•	Establish systems for the training, mentoring and participation of
youth health advocates. Engaging adolescents has the potential to
transform traditional models of health care delivery to create
adolescent-responsive health systems. This will also be essential to
ensure equity of access regardless of sex, ethnicity or
1.	Patel V, Saxena S, Lund C, Thornicroft G, Baingana F, Bolton P, et
al. The Lancet Commission on global mental health and
sustainable development. Lancet. 2018;392(10157):1553-98.
2.	McGorry P, Purcell R, Hickie I, Jorm A. Editorial. Investing in youth
mental health is a best buy. Med J Australia. 2007;187(7):S5-S7.
3.	Azzopardi PS, Hearps SJC, Francis KL et al. Progress in
adolescent health and well-being: tracking 12 headline indicators
for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2016. Lancet.
4.	World Health Organization. Adolescent mental health. Fact sheet.
5.	Patton GC, Sawyer SM, Santelli JS et al. Our future: a Lancet
commission on adolescent health and well-being. Lancet.
6.	Plan International, UNICEF, World Health Organization et al.
Adolescent health. The missing population in universal health
7.	World Health Organization. Global Health Estimates. 2019.
8.	Wesselhoeft R, Sorensen MJ, Heiervang ER, Bilenberg N.
Subthreshold depression in children and adolescents – a
systematic review. J Affect Disord. 2013;151(1):7-22.
9.	World Health Organization. Global accelerated action for the
health of adolescents (AA-HA!): guidance to support country
implementation. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017.
10.	Turecki G, Brent DA. Suicide and suicidal behaviour. Lancet.
11.	Patton GC, Coffey C, Romaniuk H et al. The prognosis of
common mental disorders in adolescents: a 14-year prospective
12.	Kessler RC, Amminger GP, Aguilar-Gaxiola S et al. Age of onset
of mental disorders: a review of recent literature. Curr Opin
13.	Frankish H, Boyce N, Horton R. Mental health for all: a global
14.	Tomlinson M, Lund C. Why does mental health not get the
attention it deserves? An application of the Shiffman and Smith
framework. PLoS Med. 2012;9(2):e1001178.
15.	Li Z, Li M, Patton GC, Lu C. Global development assistance for
adolescent health from 2003 to 2015. JAMA Netw Open.
16.	Skokauskas N, Lavelle TA, Munir K et al. The cost of child and
adolescent mental health services. Lancet Psychiatry.
17.	Government Inquiry into Mental Health and Addiction. He Ara
Oranga (Pathways to Wellness). New Zealand; 2018. Available at:
18.	Rickwood DJ, Deane FP, Wilson CJ. When and how do young
people seek professional help for mental health problems? Med J
19.	Tomlinson M. Opinion piece. Gains from early childhood
intervention can be lost. Could teen top-ups help? Apolitical.
20.	Burstow P. Mental health – time to stop chasing demand and
start tackling the causes. BMJ. 2018. Available at:
21.	World Health Organization. Health for the world’s adolescents.
A second chance in the second decade. Geneva: World Health
22.	The World Bank. Mental health 2018. Available at:
23.	World Health Organization. mhGAP Intervention Guide for mental,
neurological and substance use disorders in non-specialized health
settings. Version 2.0. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016.
24.	World Health Organization. Adolescent mental health 2019.
25.	The Lancet Commission on global mental health and sustainable
26.	World Health Organization. The Global Action for Measurement
of Adolescent Health (GAMA) 2019. Available at:
27.	UNICEF. Measurement of Mental Health Among Adolescents at
28.	Every Woman Every Child. Global Strategy for Women’s
Children’s and Adolescents’ Health (2016-2030). 2015.
29.	Skeen S, Laurenzi CA, Gordon SL et al. Adolescent mental health
program components and behavior risk reduction: a meta-
30.	Brenman NF, Luitel NP, Mall S, Jordans MJ. Demand and access
to mental health services: a qualitative formative study in Nepal.
BMC Int Health Hum Rights. 2014;14:22.
31.	Lund C, Brooke-Sumner C, Baingana F et al. Social determinants
of mental disorders and the Sustainable Development Goals: a
systematic review of reviews. Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5(4):357-69.
32.	Kapungu C, Petroni S, Allen NB et al. Gendered influences on
adolescent mental health in low-income and middle-income
countries: recommendations from an expert convening. Lancet
Child Adolesc Health. 2018;2(2):85-6.
33.	New Zealand Ministry of Education. Kāhui Ako: evidence and
34.	Western Cape Government. Gamechangers: alcohol harms
Scientific writer: Rachael Hinton, RHEdit. Editor: Joanne McManus. Technical Contributors (alphabetical order): Cristina De
Carvalho Eriksson, UNICEF; Danielle Engel, UNFPA; Charity Giyava, Youth Engage, Zimbabwe; Regina Guthold, the World Health
Sangath, India; David Ross, the World Health Organization; Chiara Servili, the World Health Organization; Sarah Skeen,
Stellenbosch University; Josiah Tualamali’i, Youth Wellbeing Advocate, Aotearoa New Zealand; Claire van der Westhuizen, Alan
J Flisher Centre for Public Mental Health, University of Cape Town; William Yeung, ReachOut. Coordinators: Anshu Mohan,
Meheret (Mimi) Melles-Brewer, The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health. Design: Annovi Design.
PMNCH Knowledge Summaries synthesize recent evidence into a clear and concise, user-friendly format to support advocacy,
policy and practice on issues related to reproductive, maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health and well-being.
Each Knowledge Summary is targeted at policy makers, champions and PMNCH constituencies. PMNCH works actively
with partners from different organizations and constituencies not only to develop the series, but also to ensure the
summaries reach key stakeholders.